_dasldemos/proof-troubleshooting.md, before:

---
title: PROOF Troubleshooting
---

For users that have a well-tested and established WDL workflow, the [PROOF How-To documentation](/dasldemos/proof-how-to/) should provide enough guidance to help a user through a typical process of job submission. However, while developing a new and untested WDL workflow, it's common to run into all sorts of issues, some as simple as typos, others as complex as entire software environments. The goal of this guide is to teach users where to find (and how to interpret) the more advanced features and behaviors of PROOF in order to debug their custom WDL scripts and get their research up and running. 

## Common PROOF Server Issues

### Make sure your PROOF server is up and running

- By default, PROOF servers run for seven days before they shut down automatically. If submitting/validating a workflow produces an error message like “Your server is not up!”, you’ll need to start up another PROOF server via [the “PROOF Server” tab](/dasldemos/proof-how-to#setup-your-proof-server). Analysis jobs in progress will not be affected by the restart and all previous job history will be saved.
- If you just started your PROOF server, and received this message, the server may need additional time before it can communicate with the app, wait 1-2 minutes and try again.  
- If the screen is grayed out and you’re unable to press buttons at all, your browser has timed out and just needs a quick refresh.

### Try stopping and restarting your PROOF server

- Occasionally, our product team will push updates to the underlying repositories of PROOF to fix issues and add functionalities. However, only servers created _after_ the update will get that added/fixed functionality.
- If your server has been running for a few days, it is definitely worth [stopping and restarting](/dasldemos/proof-how-to/#setup-your-proof-server) your PROOF server. If any recent updates have been pushed, your new server will pick them up and hopefully that will fix your issue. And even if nothing's been updated, always worth trying the old standby of "turning it off and on again."

## Workflow Level Issues

### Validate your workflow

- Before submitting a job, validate your WDL script and an input json via [the “Validate” tab in PROOF](/dasldemos/proof-how-to#validate-a-wdl-workflow). This will catch typos and larger structural issues in your script. Ideally, you should see something to the effect of `$valid [1] TRUE` , but here are a few of the non-ideal scenarios:
    - **Variable typo in the WDL**: Let’s say I accidentally referred to a variable called `bedfile` as `bedFile` at some point later in the workflow. Since WDL is case-sensitive, the validation step should throw an error that looks like the screenshot below. Specifically, it will call out the mismatched variable by name (`Cannot lookup value ‘bedFile’`) and provide a list of alternatives defined in the script.
    
    ![var_typo_wdl](/dasldemos/assets/proof_ts_var_typo_wdl.png)
    
    - **Variable typo in the input json**: what if I accidentally referred to a variable called `batch_file` as `batchFile` in the input json? As seen in the screenshot below, the validation results will specify that a required input is missing and also clarify that the workflow itself is valid (i.e. `$validWorkflow [1] TRUE`).
    
    <img src="/dasldemos/assets/proof_ts_var_typo_json.png" alt="var_type_json" width="500"/>
    
    - **File path typo in the input json**: let’s say I accidentally point the `batch_file` variable in the input json to `/path_to_inputs/inputs.tsv`, when it’s actually located at `/path_to_tsvs/inputs.tsv`. Or maybe I accidentally put the relative path instead of the absolute path, e.g. `inputs.tsv`. Unfortunately, the validation feature only checks for WDL syntax errors, not whether a provided input will actually run within a given task. So in this case, the typo would slip past the validation step and the logs would indicate that the WDL script and input json are valid. Only upon actual submission of the workflow will this issue be identified ([see below](/dasldemos/proof-troubleshooting/#check-the-workflow-metadata) for tips on this scenario).
    - **Missing closing bracket in workflow/task**: let’s say that in all of my development enthusiasm, I forgot to put a closing bracket on one of the sections of my workflow and/or task. The resulting validation message should say something to the effect of `ERROR: Unexpected symbol (line ##, col #)… Expected rbrace, got <something else>`. If you navigate to the line in question, the missing closing bracket should be a few lines above that. In addition, the [WDL Syntax Highlighter](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=broadinstitute.wdl) extension in VS Code is a huge help in identifying these kinds of typos.
    
    <img src="/dasldemos/assets/proof_ts_missing_bracket.png" alt="missing_bracket" width="650"/>
    
    - If you see any unique messages besides these ones, please send us a screenshot at [wilds@fredhutch.org](mailto:wilds@fredhutch.org) or schedule a Research Computing DHC with the DaSL staff. We’ll help work through it with you and add it to the list!

### Workflow aborted unexpectedly
If you encounter a scenario where your validated workflow is unexpectedly aborted here is how you would troubleshoot for different use-cases:
    1. **Missing inputs**: In this case you may have syntactically defined your input in the workflow however these inputs may not be available or accessible. In this case, in PROOF you will see in your workflow/workflow_id/task/execution/stderr file this message: "slurmstepd: error: *** JOB XXXXXXXX ON gizmoXX CANCELLED AT year-month-dayThh:mm:ss ***". This is a special feature of PROOF and lets the user know that either they don't have access to specific files required as inputs in this task or the file path given may not be accurate. 
    2. **Output storage issues**: Another reason that your workflow fails to start could be if you do not have write permissions in the specified output directories. So evethough it might validate if you do not have write permissions this could cause your workflow to fail.
    
## Task Level Issues

### Identify which task failed

- Start by navigating to [the “Track Jobs” tab of PROOF](/dasldemos/proof-how-to#track-wdl-workflow-runs) and identify the workflow run of interest from a list of recent jobs run via PROOF.
- Click on the "Workflow Details" button for the entry corresponding to the workflow run in question. This will automatically bring you to the "Workflow Details" tab of PROOF populated with details for that run.
- By default, you will start in the "Job List" subtab which you can scroll through to identify tasks with an "executionStatus" of "Failed". This will narrow down your issue to a particular task and the table itself will provide information that will be useful in your troubleshooting endeavors.

![job_list_failed](/dasldemos/assets/proof_ts_job_list_failed_task.png)

### Identify why the task failed

- Near the top of the "Workflow Details" tab, you'll notice a subtab called "Job Failures". Navigate to that subtab and click “Get/Refresh Failed Job Metadata” to populate the table with details about your failed task. The `failures.causedBy.message` columns are of particular interest as they contain the error messages produced by the task. In this example pictured below, I provided an erroneous path for one of my inputs, and as you can see, the tool “could not localize” it:

![job_failures](/dasldemos/assets/proof_ts_job_failures.png)

- If these messages don’t provide enough information, navigate back to the “Job List” subtab and take a look at a few additional columns:
    - **stdout & stderr**: these columns contain the location of flat files that contain the output and error messages from the command line tools used during the task(s) in question. These will help to provide tool-specific feedback as to what might be going wrong. To access these, copy the path provided, log on to Rhino, and view the text files via `more` , `less`, or `cat`.
    - **commandLine**: this column contains the exact command that was run during this task. Check to see if anything looks off, maybe an improper string concatenation, maybe a reference to the wrong WDL variable. If so, navigate to the “command” section of the task to see what might be causing the issue.
    - **docker**: this column contains the name of the Docker container that was used in the task. First, check for typos, but if the image name and version tag appear to be correct, try pulling the container locally using Docker (or Apptainer on Rhino/Gizmo). If it pulls successfully, try running exactly what is written in the commandLine column within the container.

## Execution Issues

### Check the workflow metadata

- If these resources still don’t provide any sort of illumination, navigate back to the "Workflow Details" of the workflow run of interest and click on the ["Troubleshoot" subtab](](/dasldemos/proof-how-to#get-workflow-run-details)). This should display a large unformatted json, mostly containing the same information as the tables mentioned above, but it could contain a detail that was missed by PROOF’s user interface.
- Along the same lines, you can also look into the raw workflow log produced by your underlying PROOF server. To do this, identify your workflow log directory on the "Server” tab (see screenshot below) and navigate to that directory on Rhino. Once there, you will see a collection of files following the naming convention of `workflow.[workflowid].log`. Open the logfile corresponding to the workflow in question using your text viewer of choice (`more`, `less`, `cat`, VS Code) to see details about the Cromwell execution of your WDL script.

![workflow_logs](/dasldemos/assets/proof_ts_workflow_logs.png)

### Always reset forms during validation/submission

- If you decide to validate/submit another workflow during the same login session, the previous values will initially remain in the form. You can still select a different file using the "Browse" button, but it is very easy to forget to update all fields, in which case PROOF will just use the previous value.
- We highly recommend clicking the "Reset Form" button to clear previously existing values from all fields (see screenshot below). This will allow you to start from scratch and be confident that you are validating/submitting the latest version of your workflow.

![reset_form](/dasldemos/assets/proof_ts_reset_form.png)

## Docker Container Issues

### Creating your own Docker image

- If you’re creating/troubleshooting your own Docker image and you push an update to the same version tag, you may need to clear your [Apptainer cache](https://apptainer.org/docs/user/main/cli/apptainer_cache_clean.html) for PROOF to download a new copy of the image. Otherwise, PROOF will just reuse the previous cached version of the image, therefore not incorporating your changes.
- To remove the cached images, start by identifying your Apptainer cache directory at the bottom of the ["Server” tab](/dasldemos/proof-how-to#setup-your-proof-server) of PROOF (see screenshot below). Navigate to that directory in Rhino and delete all files in that directory ending in `.sif`.
    - *Don’t delete the entire directory*. PROOF needs it to function properly and will not be able to properly submit jobs without it. If that does happen, you can recreate the directory by stopping and restarting your PROOF server.

<img src="/dasldemos/assets/proof_ts_singularity_cache.png" alt="singularity_cache" width="600"/>

- DaSL also has a collection of images for commonly used bioinformatics tools in the [WILDS Docker Library](https://github.com/orgs/getwilds/packages) and we are always looking to expand it. If you think the Fred Hutch community would benefit from a new tool in this container library, please feel free to reach out to us at [wilds@fredhutch.org](mailto:wilds@fredhutch.org) or schedule a [Research Computing Data House Call](https://calendly.com/data-house-calls/computing?back=1&month=2024-04) to talk through things in person!

## Resources and Help

- [PROOF How-To documentation](/dasldemos/proof-how-to/)
- [Developing WDL Workflows Guide](https://hutchdatascience.org/Developing_WDL_Workflows/)
- [WILDS WDL Repositories](https://github.com/getwilds?q=ww-&type=all&language=&sort=)
- [WILDS Docker Library](https://github.com/orgs/getwilds/packages)
- [Using Docker at Fred Hutch](/compdemos/Docker/)
- [DaSL Research Computing Data House Calls](https://calendly.com/data-house-calls/computing)
- [DaSL Community Studios](https://hutchdatascience.org/communitystudios/)

Commit message:

Removing usernames from filepaths in PROOF troubleshooting

_dasldemos/proof-troubleshooting.md, after:

---
title: PROOF Troubleshooting
---

For users that have a well-tested and established WDL workflow, the [PROOF How-To documentation](/dasldemos/proof-how-to/) should provide enough guidance to help a user through a typical process of job submission. However, while developing a new and untested WDL workflow, it's common to run into all sorts of issues, some as simple as typos, others as complex as entire software environments. The goal of this guide is to teach users where to find (and how to interpret) the more advanced features and behaviors of PROOF in order to debug their custom WDL scripts and get their research up and running. 

## Common PROOF Server Issues

### Make sure your PROOF server is up and running

- By default, PROOF servers run for seven days before they shut down automatically. If submitting/validating a workflow produces an error message like “Your server is not up!”, you’ll need to start up another PROOF server via [the “PROOF Server” tab](/dasldemos/proof-how-to#setup-your-proof-server). Analysis jobs in progress will not be affected by the restart and all previous job history will be saved.
- If you just started your PROOF server, and received this message, the server may need additional time before it can communicate with the app, wait 1-2 minutes and try again.  
- If the screen is grayed out and you’re unable to press buttons at all, your browser has timed out and just needs a quick refresh.

### Try stopping and restarting your PROOF server

- Occasionally, our product team will push updates to the underlying repositories of PROOF to fix issues and add functionalities. However, only servers created _after_ the update will get that added/fixed functionality.
- If your server has been running for a few days, it is definitely worth [stopping and restarting](/dasldemos/proof-how-to/#setup-your-proof-server) your PROOF server. If any recent updates have been pushed, your new server will pick them up and hopefully that will fix your issue. And even if nothing's been updated, always worth trying the old standby of "turning it off and on again."

## Workflow Level Issues

### Validate your workflow

- Before submitting a job, validate your WDL script and an input json via [the “Validate” tab in PROOF](/dasldemos/proof-how-to#validate-a-wdl-workflow). This will catch typos and larger structural issues in your script. Ideally, you should see something to the effect of `$valid [1] TRUE` , but here are a few of the non-ideal scenarios:
    - **Variable typo in the WDL**: Let’s say I accidentally referred to a variable called `bedfile` as `bedFile` at some point later in the workflow. Since WDL is case-sensitive, the validation step should throw an error that looks like the screenshot below. Specifically, it will call out the mismatched variable by name (`Cannot lookup value ‘bedFile’`) and provide a list of alternatives defined in the script.
    
    ![var_typo_wdl](/dasldemos/assets/proof_ts_var_typo_wdl.png)
    
    - **Variable typo in the input json**: what if I accidentally referred to a variable called `batch_file` as `batchFile` in the input json? As seen in the screenshot below, the validation results will specify that a required input is missing and also clarify that the workflow itself is valid (i.e. `$validWorkflow [1] TRUE`).
    
    <img src="/dasldemos/assets/proof_ts_var_typo_json.png" alt="var_type_json" width="500"/>
    
    - **Bad file path in the input json**: let’s say I accidentally point the `batch_file` variable in the input json to `/path_to_inputs/inputs.tsv`, when it’s actually located at `/path_to_tsvs/inputs.tsv`. Or maybe I accidentally put the relative path instead of the absolute path, e.g. `inputs.tsv`. Or maybe I forgot that I deleted `inputs.tsv` last week. Unfortunately, the validation feature only checks for WDL syntax errors, not whether a provided input exists or will actually run within a given task. So in this case, the typo would slip past the validation step and the logs would indicate that the WDL script and input json are valid. Only upon actual submission of the workflow will this issue be identified ([see below](/dasldemos/proof-troubleshooting/#check-the-workflow-metadata) for tips on this scenario).
    - **Missing closing bracket in workflow/task**: let’s say that in all of my development enthusiasm, I forgot to put a closing bracket on one of the sections of my workflow and/or task. The resulting validation message should say something to the effect of `ERROR: Unexpected symbol (line ##, col #)… Expected rbrace, got <something else>`. If you navigate to the line in question, the missing closing bracket should be a few lines above that. In addition, the [WDL Syntax Highlighter](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=broadinstitute.wdl) extension in VS Code is a huge help in identifying these kinds of typos.
    
    <img src="/dasldemos/assets/proof_ts_missing_bracket.png" alt="missing_bracket" width="650"/>
    
    - If you see any unique messages besides these ones, please send us a screenshot at [wilds@fredhutch.org](mailto:wilds@fredhutch.org) or schedule a Research Computing DHC with the DaSL staff. We’ll help work through it with you and add it to the list!

### Check permissions for input/output files

- **Missing inputs**: let's say you provide an input file from an S3 bucket that you don't have access to. In this case, PROOF will automatically shut down the task and let the user know that either they don't have access to specific files required as inputs for this task or the file path given may not be accurate. 
- **Output storage issues**: Another reason that your workflow fails could be if you do not have write permissions in the specified output directories. So even though the workflow might validate correctly, if you do not have write permissions on the specified output directory, this could cause your workflow to fail.
    
## Task Level Issues

### Identify which task failed

- Start by navigating to [the “Track Jobs” tab of PROOF](/dasldemos/proof-how-to#track-wdl-workflow-runs) and identify the workflow run of interest from a list of recent jobs run via PROOF.
- Click on the "Workflow Details" button for the entry corresponding to the workflow run in question. This will automatically bring you to the "Workflow Details" tab of PROOF populated with details for that run.
- By default, you will start in the "Job List" subtab which you can scroll through to identify tasks with an "executionStatus" of "Failed". This will narrow down your issue to a particular task and the table itself will provide information that will be useful in your troubleshooting endeavors.

![job_list_failed](/dasldemos/assets/proof_ts_job_list_failed_task.png)

### Identify why the task failed

- Near the top of the "Workflow Details" tab, you'll notice a subtab called "Job Failures". Navigate to that subtab and click “Get/Refresh Failed Job Metadata” to populate the table with details about your failed task. The `failures.causedBy.message` columns are of particular interest as they contain the error messages produced by the task. In this example pictured below, I provided an erroneous path for one of my inputs, and as you can see, the tool “could not localize” it:

![job_failures](/dasldemos/assets/proof_ts_job_failures.png)

- If these messages don’t provide enough information, navigate back to the “Job List” subtab and take a look at a few additional columns:
    - **stdout & stderr**: these columns contain the location of flat files that contain the output and error messages from the command line tools used during the task(s) in question. These will help to provide tool-specific feedback as to what might be going wrong. To access these, copy the path provided, log on to Rhino, and view the text files via `more` , `less`, or `cat`.
    - **commandLine**: this column contains the exact command that was run during this task. Check to see if anything looks off, maybe an improper string concatenation, maybe a reference to the wrong WDL variable. If so, navigate to the “command” section of the task to see what might be causing the issue.
    - **docker**: this column contains the name of the Docker container that was used in the task. First, check for typos, but if the image name and version tag appear to be correct, try pulling the container locally using Docker (or Apptainer on Rhino/Gizmo). If it pulls successfully, try running exactly what is written in the commandLine column within the container.

## Execution Issues

### Check the workflow metadata

- If these resources still don’t provide any sort of illumination, navigate back to the "Workflow Details" of the workflow run of interest and click on the ["Troubleshoot" subtab](](/dasldemos/proof-how-to#get-workflow-run-details)). This should display a large unformatted json, mostly containing the same information as the tables mentioned above, but it could contain a detail that was missed by PROOF’s user interface.
- Along the same lines, you can also look into the raw workflow log produced by your underlying PROOF server. To do this, identify your workflow log directory on the "Server” tab (see screenshot below) and navigate to that directory on Rhino. Once there, you will see a collection of files following the naming convention of `workflow.[workflowid].log`. Open the logfile corresponding to the workflow in question using your text viewer of choice (`more`, `less`, `cat`, VS Code) to see details about the Cromwell execution of your WDL script.

![workflow_logs](/dasldemos/assets/proof_ts_workflow_logs.png)

### Always reset forms during validation/submission

- If you decide to validate/submit another workflow during the same login session, the previous values will initially remain in the form. You can still select a different file using the "Browse" button, but it is very easy to forget to update all fields, in which case PROOF will just use the previous value.
- We highly recommend clicking the "Reset Form" button to clear previously existing values from all fields (see screenshot below). This will allow you to start from scratch and be confident that you are validating/submitting the latest version of your workflow.

![reset_form](/dasldemos/assets/proof_ts_reset_form.png)

## Docker Container Issues

### Creating your own Docker image

- If you’re creating/troubleshooting your own Docker image and you push an update to the same version tag, you may need to clear your [Apptainer cache](https://apptainer.org/docs/user/main/cli/apptainer_cache_clean.html) for PROOF to download a new copy of the image. Otherwise, PROOF will just reuse the previous cached version of the image, therefore not incorporating your changes.
- To remove the cached images, start by identifying your Apptainer cache directory at the bottom of the ["Server” tab](/dasldemos/proof-how-to#setup-your-proof-server) of PROOF (see screenshot below). Navigate to that directory in Rhino and delete all files in that directory ending in `.sif`.
    - *Don’t delete the entire directory*. PROOF needs it to function properly and will not be able to properly submit jobs without it. If that does happen, you can recreate the directory by stopping and restarting your PROOF server.

<img src="/dasldemos/assets/proof_ts_singularity_cache.png" alt="singularity_cache" width="600"/>

- DaSL also has a collection of images for commonly used bioinformatics tools in the [WILDS Docker Library](https://github.com/orgs/getwilds/packages) and we are always looking to expand it. If you think the Fred Hutch community would benefit from a new tool in this container library, please feel free to reach out to us at [wilds@fredhutch.org](mailto:wilds@fredhutch.org) or schedule a [Research Computing Data House Call](https://calendly.com/data-house-calls/computing?back=1&month=2024-04) to talk through things in person!

## Resources and Help

- [PROOF How-To documentation](/dasldemos/proof-how-to/)
- [Developing WDL Workflows Guide](https://hutchdatascience.org/Developing_WDL_Workflows/)
- [WILDS WDL Repositories](https://github.com/getwilds?q=ww-&type=all&language=&sort=)
- [WILDS Docker Library](https://github.com/orgs/getwilds/packages)
- [Using Docker at Fred Hutch](/compdemos/Docker/)
- [DaSL Research Computing Data House Calls](https://calendly.com/data-house-calls/computing)
- [DaSL Community Studios](https://hutchdatascience.org/communitystudios/)
