outreach.md, before:

---
title: Wiki Outreach and Events
permalink: /outreach/
layout: single
toc: true
toc_label: "On This Page"
sidebar:
  nav: "frontpage"
---
## Translational Genomics Pop Up Events
Starting in Fall of 2018 we will begin hosting Pop Up workshops!!!  You can find up to date events by going to [the FHBig Google Calendar](https://calendar.google.com/calendar?cid=Z2QzMGRsaWZyaTRmdTdoMTA0Y3VxZGowZGdAZ3JvdXAuY2FsZW5kYXIuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbQ) and looking for those events labeled "Pop Up:...".  If you'd like to get on the roster, please email Amy Paguirigan (`apaguiri`) or go chat about it on [Slack.](https://fhbig.slack.com)  


## FH Biomedical Data Science Wiki Writer-Editor Program

The Biomedical Data Science Wiki aims to support ongoing biomedical research now and in the future. The ongoing contribution and curation of the content in the Wiki by the Fred Hutch researcher community itself is intended to serve two purposes:
- create an evolving source of documentation that grows and changes along with the particular interests and research tools available to Fred Hutch researchers over time, and
- tailors and unifies content that bridges the divide between how research processes are performed *in general* and how those processes are performed at the Fred Hutch *specifically.*


The Wiki Writer-Editor program is intended to engage current Fred Hutch based postdocs, staff scientists and research specialists in order to ensure that the resource achieves those two goals.  We aim to incorporate more information relevant to new and emerging projects or technologies in which Fred Hutch researchers are involved or use, and also provide a mechanism for feedback regarding what additional documentation is needed to support their research.  The Wiki Writer-Editor program engages current Fred Hutch postdocs, staff scientists and research specialists from each of the Divisions for 3 month positions, and a stipend is provided.  

### Responsibilities
Responsibilities for a Wiki Writer-Editor include:
- An initial meeting for training on how to manage contributions and editing via GitHub (web OR desktop client training will be provided, no previous experience needed).  
- Participation in a weekly in-person meeting of the larger Wiki Contributors group (1hr)
- ~3 hours per week of writing documentation in your primary area of expertise and/or editing existing documents both in and outside of your primary area of expertise.  This work is done remotely, anytime during the week, and contributions are submitted regularly via GitHub.  Contributions are then reviewed and incorporated along with all other contributions at the weekly Wiki Contributors meeting.

### Requirements
- Ability to write clearly and concisely for a wide range of scientific audiences and levels of expertise.  
- Ability to self-direct and time manage to make your contributions have the most value as well as coordinate with your research.  
- Ability to work collaboratively and professionally with others who will both edit your writing and whose writing you will edit.  
- An interest in contributing to the Fred Hutch research community.
- An interest in learning more about realms of biomedical research and resources here at Fred Hutch that you may not already be familiar with!

### Application Materials
To apply, these brief application materials need to be combined into a single pdf file and emailed to Amy Paguirigan (`apaguiri`).
- Name, Primary Division affiliation, Current Mentor/Lab(s), Current Position
- A brief (½ page max) summary of your current research focus along with your current data-oriented learning needs (what you WISH you knew) and your primary domain of data experience (what you ALREADY know)
- A sample of your writing - preference is for text intended for as general a scientific audience as possible, such as an abstract or other review article, and for text that as closely reflects your writing style as possible (without heavy editing by others)
- Your current CV (a link to it or some online profile can suffice, e.g., a complete LinkedIn profile or a personal website)

### Selection process
When applications are received, applicants will be provided a short article (likely from existing Wiki content) to edit and return prior to selection.  We aim to select up to 3 researchers per session and ideally each cohort will be comprised of researchers with primary affiliations in different Fred Hutch Divisions.

Commit message:

Reduce now that CenterNet is here.

outreach.md, after:

---
title: Wiki Outreach and Events
permalink: /outreach/
layout: single
toc: true
toc_label: "On This Page"
sidebar:
  nav: "frontpage"
---

## Communication and Events
### Wiki Contributors
To get involved there are many ways to find us:
- The Wiki team has weekly, "office hours" style Wiki Working meetings that you can stop by and get some assistance to get set up, or just chime in with your edits, typo-finds and suggestions when time permits!  The current schedule can be found on the [FHBig Google calendar,](https://calendar.google.com/calendar/r?cid=Z2QzMGRsaWZyaTRmdTdoMTA0Y3VxZGowZGdAZ3JvdXAuY2FsZW5kYXIuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbQ) just look for "Wiki Working Meeting" in the event name, or please email `sciwiki` for more information.  

- Join the **FHBig** Slack workspace via [this link, and use your fredhutch.org email to join.](https://join.slack.com/t/fhbig/shared_invite/enQtMzUyMDIxNzk3MDU3LWNjMDg3ZDVhNGZiNTBlODRmNWM5ZjczMzI1MGNmZTg4NGQ5ODgzMGNmMjcyNzMxMDc0YWFlN2VkNjI4NGZjNjg)  In this Slack workspace we have a #wikicontributors channel where you can chime in with edits, get updates about next meetings, goals and our next steps.  

- Follow along in our GitHub repository where we are curating this content [if you have gotten set up to use the Fred Hutch GitHub organization account, see below for instructions.](https://github.com/FredHutch/wiki)


### Translational Genomics Pop Up Events
Starting in Fall of 2018 we will begin hosting Pop Up workshops!!!  You can find up to date events by going to [the FHBig Google Calendar](https://calendar.google.com/calendar?cid=Z2QzMGRsaWZyaTRmdTdoMTA0Y3VxZGowZGdAZ3JvdXAuY2FsZW5kYXIuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbQ) and looking for those events labeled "Pop Up:...".  If you'd like to get on the roster, please email Amy Paguirigan (`apaguiri`) or go chat about it on [Slack.](https://fhbig.slack.com)  



## FH Biomedical Data Science Wiki Writer-Editor Program

The Biomedical Data Science Wiki aims to support ongoing biomedical research now and in the future. The ongoing contribution and curation of the content in the Wiki by the Fred Hutch researcher community itself is intended to serve two purposes:
- create an evolving source of documentation that grows and changes along with the particular interests and research tools available to Fred Hutch researchers over time, and
- tailors and unifies content that bridges the divide between how research processes are performed *in general* and how those processes are performed at the Fred Hutch *specifically.*


The Wiki Writer-Editor program is intended to engage current Fred Hutch based postdocs, staff scientists and research specialists in order to ensure that the resource achieves those two goals.  We aim to incorporate more information relevant to new and emerging projects or technologies in which Fred Hutch researchers are involved or use, and also provide a mechanism for feedback regarding what additional documentation is needed to support their research.  The Wiki Writer-Editor program engages current Fred Hutch postdocs, staff scientists and research specialists from each of the Divisions for 3 month positions, and a stipend is provided.  

### Responsibilities
Responsibilities for a Wiki Writer-Editor include:
- An initial meeting for training on how to manage contributions and editing via GitHub (web OR desktop client training will be provided, no previous experience needed).  
- Participation in a weekly in-person meeting of the larger Wiki Contributors group (1hr)
- ~3 hours per week of writing documentation in your primary area of expertise and/or editing existing documents both in and outside of your primary area of expertise.  This work is done remotely, anytime during the week, and contributions are submitted regularly via GitHub.  Contributions are then reviewed and incorporated along with all other contributions at the weekly Wiki Contributors meeting.

### Requirements
- Ability to write clearly and concisely for a wide range of scientific audiences and levels of expertise.  
- Ability to self-direct and time manage to make your contributions have the most value as well as coordinate with your research.  
- Ability to work collaboratively and professionally with others who will both edit your writing and whose writing you will edit.  
- An interest in contributing to the Fred Hutch research community.
- An interest in learning more about realms of biomedical research and resources here at Fred Hutch that you may not already be familiar with!

### Application Materials
To apply, these brief application materials need to be combined into a single pdf file and emailed to Amy Paguirigan (`apaguiri`).
- Name, Primary Division affiliation, Current Mentor/Lab(s), Current Position
- A brief (½ page max) summary of your current research focus along with your current data-oriented learning needs (what you WISH you knew) and your primary domain of data experience (what you ALREADY know)
- A sample of your writing - preference is for text intended for as general a scientific audience as possible, such as an abstract or other review article, and for text that as closely reflects your writing style as possible (without heavy editing by others)
- Your current CV (a link to it or some online profile can suffice, e.g., a complete LinkedIn profile or a personal website)

### Selection process
When applications are received, applicants will be provided a short article (likely from existing Wiki content) to edit and return prior to selection.  We aim to select up to 3 researchers per session and ideally each cohort will be comprised of researchers with primary affiliations in different Fred Hutch Divisions.
