_hdc/hdc_training.md, before:

---
title: Training and Documentation
hdc: True
---

Fred Hutch offers a variety of educational resources on aspects of bioinformatics, analytics, and working with data. Here you can find the opportunties for training and help offered through Fred Hutch as well as access a resource library of external online educational content.

## Instructor-led training

We hope to offer instructor-led training and workshops in the near future.

Keep an eye out for:
- Journal clubs to bring together people with shared interests in a particular method or technology to discuss current, high-impact papers.
- Workshops that offer training specific to Fred Hutch infrastructure such as how to effectively use the Slurm cluster or access and use AWS.

>Instructor-led opportunties are in the planning stage and pending staff support.

## Self-directed learning

For those who aren't able to attend in-person courses we have a range of stand alone resources to help guide their self-directed learning. 

- Fredhutch.io is an initiative to facilitate education about and promote access to computational resources at Fred Hutch. Those interested in learning core computational skills like R and Python can work through this content at their own pace.
  - [Intro to Python](https://fredhutchio.github.io/python_intro/)
  - [Intermediate Python](https://fredhutchio.github.io/python_programming/)
  - [Intro to R](https://fredhutchio.github.io/r_intro/)

- [Bioinformatics and Genomics Resource Library](/bioinformatics_library.md) is a curated list of external resources related to bioinformatics and genomics including peer reviewed papers, blog posts, and video tutorials.

- [The Scientific Computing Resource Library](https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/compdemos/) includes tutorials of how to perform common computational tasks using software available at Fred Hutch. Below we've highlighted a few popular links, but be sure to check out the page to see all the tutorials available.
  - [How to Rhino](../_compdemos/howtoRhino.md)
  - [R Tips and Tricks](../_compdemos/R_tips_tricks.md)
  - [Accessing Economy Local Storage](../_compdemos/Economy-storage.md)

- [Code templates and examples](../_scicomputing/software_examples.md) have been developed for those who are interested in implementing methods from the Scientific Computing Resource Library on their own data following best practices for reproducibility. Code templates are provided for setting up your own analyses, as well as addtional examples of executable code that can be tailored to suit your own needs.

>Due to the nature of self-directed learning there is no instructor immediately available to answer questions or troubleshoot. Please bring questions to the relevant office hours (listed below) or to the [Coop Communities Slack](fhbig.slack.com).

## Office hours 

- __Hutch Data Core:__ Staff are available to assist researchers in getting started with bioinformatics and orienting staff to resources for improving their coding, including troubleshooting application of code to research questions.
  - Hosted Every Tuesday from 9:00 to noon, staffed by Lauren Wolfe
- __Scientific Computing - General:__ Scientific Computing (SciComp) manages basic account access for research computing resources, including data storage and shared computational cluster use. Staff are available to answer questions related to access and usage of Hutch resources for computational research.
  - Hosted every Wednesday from 10:00 to noon, staffed by Ben McGough
- __Scientific Computing - Cloud/Next Gen:__ In addition to general consulting (see above), Scientific Computing (SciComp) supports researchers interested in emerging technologies like next generation sequencing and cloud computing. Staff are available to answer questions about getting started building analytical pipelines in the cloud, and generally making computation more scalable and reproducible.
  - Hosted every Tuesday from 3:00 to 4:30, staffed by Dan Tenenbaum
- __Ethics and Compliance:__ Staff from the Center Information Technology (CIT) Compliance Office with expertise in information security are available to answer questions related to secure data management and resources at the Hutch for security compliance.
  - Hosted every Wednesday from 10:00 to noon, staffed by Susan Glick

>Office hours can also be found on the Centernet Calendar.  
>Due to COVID-19 all office hours are currently hosted through MS Teams.

## Resources In Seattle

- [UW Biostatistics Summer Institutes](https://www.biostat.washington.edu/suminst) offer yearly intensive courses over the summers on a wide variety of topics.
- [Meetup](https://www.meetup.com) hosts various coding groups that meet regularly to share skills and provide networking opportunities. [RLadies Seattle](https://www.meetup.com/rladies-seattle/) and [Seattle UseR](https://www.meetup.com/Seattle-useR/) both include leaders from Fred Hutch.


## Resources On the Web

### Classroom-Style Courses
These resources are organized in a lecture type format as slides, screencasts, and video. Most are work-at-your-own-pace, but some may be linked to a course calander. 

- [MCB517A: Tools for Computational Biology](https://github.com/fredhutchio/tfcb_2019): A graduate-level course taught for UW by Fred Hutch CompBio faculty. This links to a GitHub repository that includes all lectures and homework.
  - [How to install necessary software for this course](https://github.com/fredhutchio/tfcb_2019/tree/master/software)
  - [Ask questions about this course](https://github.com/fredhutchio/tfcb_2019/issues)
  - *Course materials all available for free*

- [edX](https://www.edx.org): Offers a collection of courses for [Data Analysis and Statistics](https://www.edx.org/course/subject/data-analysis-statistics) and [Bioinformatics](https://www.edx.org/learn/bioinformatics)
  - [Rafael Irizarry](http://rafalab.github.io/) of Dana Farber has online programs available through edX:
    - [Introduction to Data Science](https://www.edx.org/professional-certificate/harvardx-data-science)
    - [Data Analysis for Life Sciences](https://www.edx.org/professional-certificate/harvardx-data-analysis-for-life-sciences)
    - [Data Anaysis for Genomics](https://www.edx.org/professional-certificate/harvardx-data-analysis-for-genomics)
  - *Generally speaking, edX courses are all free to audit for a limited period of time. Unlimited access and the ability to earn a course Certificate will require payment*
  
- [Coursera](https://www.coursera.org): Offers a collection of courses for [Data Science](https://www.coursera.org/browse/data-science) and [Bioinformatics](https://www.coursera.org/browse/life-sciences/bioinformatics)
  - [R Programming](https://www.coursera.org/specializations/data-science-foundations-r): A beginner-level program has five mini-courses. It takes about 4 months to complete.
  - [Statistics with R](https://www.coursera.org/specializations/statistics): A beginner-level program with five mini-courses. It takes about 7 months to complete.
  - [Genomic Data Science](https://www.coursera.org/specializations/genomic-data-science): An intermediate-level program for those who are already aquainted with R. It has eight mini-courses. It takes about 6 months to complete.
  - [Python Programming](https://www.coursera.org/specializations/data-science-python): An intermediate-level program that takes about 4 months to complete.
  - *Coursera offers a 7-day free trial, and is a paid subscription service after*

- [Udacity](https://www.udacity.com): Offers a collection of courses for [Data Science](https://www.udacity.com/courses/school-of-data-science)
  - *Udacity is a paid subscription service*
  - [Currently offering one month free for their Nanodegree programs.](https://blog.udacity.com/2020/03/one-month-free-on-nanodegrees.html)

- [Udemy](https://www.udemy.com): Offers a collection of courses for [Data Science](https://www.udemy.com/courses/development/data-science/)
  - *Udemy offers courses at various price points.*
  - Keep an eye out for sales which happen regularly and can drastically reduce the cost.

- [CognitiveClass.ai](https://cognitiveclass.ai/) Offers a collection of courses for data science, AI, and cloud computing.
  - *All courses are free*

- [The Open Source Data Science Masters](http://datasciencemasters.org): An open-source curriculum for learning data science. This is a mixed media course made up of videos, books, and slides.
  - *Some content is free, some is paid*
  
- [CalTech](http://work.caltech.edu/telecourse) Learning from Data
  - *A free YouTube series*

### Interactive Coding Platforms
These resources offer classes that are work-at-your-own-pace with a major focus on hands-on problem-sets and projects.

- [DataQuest](https://www.dataquest.io/): A subscription service that offers programs and courses focused on data anlysis and engineering in Python and R.
    - *Tiered payment system with basic and premium plans*
    
- [CodeAcademy](https://www.codecademy.com/): A subscription service that offers coding programs and courses in many different languages.
  - *Tiered payment system with limited content available for free*

### Free ebooks

- [Biostar Handbook: A Beginner's Guide to Bioinformatics](https://www.biostarhandbook.com)

- [R Cookbook Second Edition](https://rc2e.com/)

- [Advanced R](https://adv-r.hadley.nz/)

- [R for Data Science](https://r4ds.had.co.nz/)

- [O'Reilly books](https://www.spl.org/books-and-media/books-and-ebooks/safari-books-online) available through Seattle Public Library

### Misc

- [The Carpentries](https://carpentries.org), with lessons from [Data Carpentry](https://datacarpentry.org) and [Software Carpentry](https://software-carpentry.org/lessons/)

- [ROSALIND interactive bioinformatics problem set](http://rosalind.info/)

_Please reach out to the Hutch Data Core by sending an email to `hutchdatacore` with questions, comments, or suggestions related to training!_

Commit message:

fill in shared resource office hours

_hdc/hdc_training.md, after:

---
title: Training and Documentation
hdc: True
---

Fred Hutch offers a variety of educational resources on aspects of bioinformatics, analytics, and working with data. Here you can find the opportunties for training and help offered through Fred Hutch as well as access a resource library of external online educational content.

## Instructor-led training

We hope to offer instructor-led training and workshops in the near future.

Keep an eye out for:
- Journal clubs to bring together people with shared interests in a particular method or technology to discuss current, high-impact papers.
- Workshops that offer training specific to Fred Hutch infrastructure such as how to effectively use the Slurm cluster or access and use AWS.

>Instructor-led opportunties are in the planning stage and pending staff support.

## Self-directed learning

For those who aren't able to attend in-person courses we have a range of stand alone resources to help guide their self-directed learning. 

- Fredhutch.io is an initiative to facilitate education about and promote access to computational resources at Fred Hutch. Those interested in learning core computational skills like R and Python can work through this content at their own pace.
  - [Intro to Python](https://fredhutchio.github.io/python_intro/)
  - [Intermediate Python](https://fredhutchio.github.io/python_programming/)
  - [Intro to R](https://fredhutchio.github.io/r_intro/)

- [Bioinformatics and Genomics Resource Library](/bioinformatics_library.md) is a curated list of external resources related to bioinformatics and genomics including peer reviewed papers, blog posts, and video tutorials.

- [The Scientific Computing Resource Library](https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/compdemos/) includes tutorials of how to perform common computational tasks using software available at Fred Hutch. Below we've highlighted a few popular links, but be sure to check out the page to see all the tutorials available.
  - [How to Rhino](../_compdemos/howtoRhino.md)
  - [R Tips and Tricks](../_compdemos/R_tips_tricks.md)
  - [Accessing Economy Local Storage](../_compdemos/Economy-storage.md)

- [Code templates and examples](../_scicomputing/software_examples.md) have been developed for those who are interested in implementing methods from the Scientific Computing Resource Library on their own data following best practices for reproducibility. Code templates are provided for setting up your own analyses, as well as addtional examples of executable code that can be tailored to suit your own needs.

>Due to the nature of self-directed learning there is no instructor immediately available to answer questions or troubleshoot. Please bring questions to the relevant office hours (listed below) or to the [Coop Communities Slack](fhbig.slack.com).

## Office hours 

- __Hutch Data Core:__ Staff are available to assist researchers in getting started with bioinformatics and orienting staff to resources for improving their coding, including troubleshooting application of code to research questions.
  - Hosted Every Tuesday from 9:00 to noon, staffed by Lauren Wolfe
- __Scientific Computing - General:__ Scientific Computing (SciComp) manages basic account access for research computing resources, including data storage and shared computational cluster use. Staff are available to answer questions related to access and usage of Hutch resources for computational research.
  - Hosted every Wednesday from 10:00 to noon, staffed by Ben McGough
- __Scientific Computing - Cloud/Next Gen:__ In addition to general consulting (see above), Scientific Computing (SciComp) supports researchers interested in emerging technologies like next generation sequencing and cloud computing. Staff are available to answer questions about getting started building analytical pipelines in the cloud, and generally making computation more scalable and reproducible.
  - Hosted every Tuesday from 3:00 to 4:30, staffed by Dan Tenenbaum
- __Ethics and Compliance:__ Staff from the Center Information Technology (CIT) Compliance Office with expertise in information security are available to answer questions related to secure data management and resources at the Hutch for security compliance.
  - Hosted every Wednesday from 10:00 to noon, staffed by Susan Glick

_Coming Soon!_
_We are currently working to formalize office hours for many of the Shared Resources offered through Fred Hutch. Please keep an eye on this page for updates!_

- __Genomics & Bioinformatics:__ Staff from the Genomics and Bioinformatics Shared Resource are available to answer questions related to the generation and analysis of genomic data from DNA array, genetic analysis and high-throughput screening methods.
- __Image Analysis:__ Staff with expertise in image analysis are available to answer questions.
  - Staffed by Julien Dubrulle 
- __Flow Cytometry:__ Staff from the Flow Cytometry Shared Resource are available to answer questions from aiding scientists on panel design, and marker and color choice to data analysis and troubleshooting.
  - Staffed by Andrew Berger
- __Proteomics & Metabolomics:__ Staff from the Proteomics and Metabolomics Shared Resource are available to answer questions related to sample preparation, sample separation, data collection and data analysis.
- __Cellular Imaging:__ Staff from the Cellular Imaging Shared Resource with expertise in advanced microscopy incluidng light microscopy and electron microscopy are available to answer questions.
- __Cryo-EM:__ Staff from the Cryo-EM Shared Resource are available to answer questions realted to sample preperation, data collection, and data processing.
  - Staffed by Caleigh Azumaya

>Office hours can also be found on the Centernet Calendar.  
>Due to COVID-19 all office hours are currently hosted through MS Teams.

## Resources In Seattle

- [UW Biostatistics Summer Institutes](https://www.biostat.washington.edu/suminst) offer yearly intensive courses over the summers on a wide variety of topics.
- [Meetup](https://www.meetup.com) hosts various coding groups that meet regularly to share skills and provide networking opportunities. [RLadies Seattle](https://www.meetup.com/rladies-seattle/) and [Seattle UseR](https://www.meetup.com/Seattle-useR/) both include leaders from Fred Hutch.


## Resources On the Web

### Classroom-Style Courses
These resources are organized in a lecture type format as slides, screencasts, and video. Most are work-at-your-own-pace, but some may be linked to a course calander. 

- [MCB517A: Tools for Computational Biology](https://github.com/fredhutchio/tfcb_2019): A graduate-level course taught for UW by Fred Hutch CompBio faculty. This links to a GitHub repository that includes all lectures and homework.
  - [How to install necessary software for this course](https://github.com/fredhutchio/tfcb_2019/tree/master/software)
  - [Ask questions about this course](https://github.com/fredhutchio/tfcb_2019/issues)
  - *Course materials all available for free*

- [edX](https://www.edx.org): Offers a collection of courses for [Data Analysis and Statistics](https://www.edx.org/course/subject/data-analysis-statistics) and [Bioinformatics](https://www.edx.org/learn/bioinformatics)
  - [Rafael Irizarry](http://rafalab.github.io/) of Dana Farber has online programs available through edX:
    - [Introduction to Data Science](https://www.edx.org/professional-certificate/harvardx-data-science)
    - [Data Analysis for Life Sciences](https://www.edx.org/professional-certificate/harvardx-data-analysis-for-life-sciences)
    - [Data Anaysis for Genomics](https://www.edx.org/professional-certificate/harvardx-data-analysis-for-genomics)
  - *Generally speaking, edX courses are all free to audit for a limited period of time. Unlimited access and the ability to earn a course Certificate will require payment*
  
- [Coursera](https://www.coursera.org): Offers a collection of courses for [Data Science](https://www.coursera.org/browse/data-science) and [Bioinformatics](https://www.coursera.org/browse/life-sciences/bioinformatics)
  - [R Programming](https://www.coursera.org/specializations/data-science-foundations-r): A beginner-level program has five mini-courses. It takes about 4 months to complete.
  - [Statistics with R](https://www.coursera.org/specializations/statistics): A beginner-level program with five mini-courses. It takes about 7 months to complete.
  - [Genomic Data Science](https://www.coursera.org/specializations/genomic-data-science): An intermediate-level program for those who are already aquainted with R. It has eight mini-courses. It takes about 6 months to complete.
  - [Python Programming](https://www.coursera.org/specializations/data-science-python): An intermediate-level program that takes about 4 months to complete.
  - *Coursera offers a 7-day free trial, and is a paid subscription service after*

- [Udacity](https://www.udacity.com): Offers a collection of courses for [Data Science](https://www.udacity.com/courses/school-of-data-science)
  - *Udacity is a paid subscription service*
  - [Currently offering one month free for their Nanodegree programs.](https://blog.udacity.com/2020/03/one-month-free-on-nanodegrees.html)

- [Udemy](https://www.udemy.com): Offers a collection of courses for [Data Science](https://www.udemy.com/courses/development/data-science/)
  - *Udemy offers courses at various price points.*
  - Keep an eye out for sales which happen regularly and can drastically reduce the cost.

- [CognitiveClass.ai](https://cognitiveclass.ai/) Offers a collection of courses for data science, AI, and cloud computing.
  - *All courses are free*

- [The Open Source Data Science Masters](http://datasciencemasters.org): An open-source curriculum for learning data science. This is a mixed media course made up of videos, books, and slides.
  - *Some content is free, some is paid*
  
- [CalTech](http://work.caltech.edu/telecourse) Learning from Data
  - *A free YouTube series*

### Interactive Coding Platforms
These resources offer classes that are work-at-your-own-pace with a major focus on hands-on problem-sets and projects.

- [DataQuest](https://www.dataquest.io/): A subscription service that offers programs and courses focused on data anlysis and engineering in Python and R.
    - *Tiered payment system with basic and premium plans*
    
- [CodeAcademy](https://www.codecademy.com/): A subscription service that offers coding programs and courses in many different languages.
  - *Tiered payment system with limited content available for free*

### Free ebooks

- [Biostar Handbook: A Beginner's Guide to Bioinformatics](https://www.biostarhandbook.com)

- [R Cookbook Second Edition](https://rc2e.com/)

- [Advanced R](https://adv-r.hadley.nz/)

- [R for Data Science](https://r4ds.had.co.nz/)

- [O'Reilly books](https://www.spl.org/books-and-media/books-and-ebooks/safari-books-online) available through Seattle Public Library

### Misc

- [The Carpentries](https://carpentries.org), with lessons from [Data Carpentry](https://datacarpentry.org) and [Software Carpentry](https://software-carpentry.org/lessons/)

- [ROSALIND interactive bioinformatics problem set](http://rosalind.info/)

_Please reach out to the Hutch Data Core by sending an email to `hutchdatacore` with questions, comments, or suggestions related to training!_
