---
title: Hutch Data Core Portals
hdc: True
---

# Data Atlases

As the scope and scale of data generated by scientific research continues to expand, the technological tools for understanding and comprehending those datasets are always being pushed to their limits. A particularly powerful new tool for visualizing complex datasets has been developed by the Fred Hutch / Brotman Brady Center for Data Visualization which uses the most modern techniques for web design to interactively render millions of points in real time.
The data atlases produced using this technology can be found at https://viz.fredhutch.org/projects/. If you are affiliated with The Fred Hutch / University of Washington Seattle Cancer Consortium and have an interest in using this technology for your research, we would love to [hear from you](mailto:mzager@fredhutch.org).


# Carousel

One of the most challenging and rewarding aspects of scientific research is the transformation of raw data into human understanding – a process which is a constant target of innovation by the research community. To support the visualization tools created and used by Fred Hutch scientists, the Data Core has developed a platform for hosting and sharing interactive datasets – Carousel. Using the Carousel platform, scientists can upload their own datasets to visualize with pre-made apps or even create their own apps with a flexible container-based visualization platform.

Carousel is currently in beta testing. If you would like to learn more or participate, please [get in touch](mailto:sminot@fredhutch.org).


# PubWeb

Some of the most powerful discoveries in modern science have been driven by the new technologies which have been developed to observe and measure the physical world, including genome sequencing, high-throughput microscopy, single-cell analysis, and protein mass spectrometry. Because of the large volume of the data produced by these platforms, scientists are increasingly required to utilize high-performance computing resources in order to analyze experimental datasets. To help scientists apply their domain-specific analysis tools to large-scale datasets, the Hutch Data Core is working to provide a user-friendly interface for running reproducible workflows on their data with a point-and-click interface. Work in this area is ongoing, with an initial platform release planned in the second half of 2021 and updates to follow.
