# Overview of Human Subjects and Genomics Research
This section contains a variety of types of information about relevant regulations and also guidance for implementing studies using human subjects, human data and/or human specimens.  Given the evolving conditions and rules surrounding studies using genetic and genomic datasets, we aim to provide an up-to-date resource about the current state of the field relating to consenting, privacy, and data management.  

## Consenting and the IRB
Informed consent is a cornerstone of the ethical conduct of research involving humans. A goal of informed consent is to ensure that subjects are aware of the risks and potential benefits of proposed research and to make an informed and voluntary decision about participating in a research study.  Unlike the risks presented by many biomedical research protocols considered by IRBs, the risks involved with genetic information can reach beyond the boundary of physical injury, and also include risks of social and psychological harm. Some types of genetic information alone can identify a single individual, and in turn have implications for family members and levy broader social considerations.  IRB review of research protocol consent(s), structure and safeguards is a critical step in genomics research.

## Data Privacy and Security
Every effort must be made to protect the identity of participants and, prior to sharing, data should be anonymized. In addition, any indirect identifiers that may lead to deductive disclosures should be removed to reduce the risk of identification. In most instances, sharing data should be possible without compromising the confidentiality of participants. However, if there are circumstances where data needs to be restricted due to the inability to protect confidentiality this should be fully addressed in the data management and sharing plan.

## De-Identification of Specimens and Data
De-identification generally refers to the removal of 18 identifiers as listed in HIPAA regulation 45 CFR 164.514(b). However, de-identification also means that in addition to the removal of these identifiers, the risk of re-identification, including applying methods which utilize publicly available data, is very small.  As individual-level genomics data can identify an individual without the 18 identifiers, de-identification of genomics data also heavily relies on additional methods of privacy and security, such as adherence to strong data use limitations and practices, and strict security policy.  In this section we address more specific approaches to incorporate into translational genomics studies to address the need for de-identification of specimens and datasets.  



## Data Sharing and Public Repository Deposition
Data Sharing in the realm of genomics and large scale datasets has highlighted some specific new challenges and possibilities.  The sharing of large scale research data has potential to strengthen academic medical research, the practice of medicine, and the integrity of the clinical trial system. Some benefits are obvious: when researchers have access to complete data, they can answer new questions, explore different lines of analysis, and more efficiently conduct large-scale analyses across trials or projects.  

The tendency to guard research data to retain ownership and property rights, avoid competition, protect confidentiality and privacy, or avoid misuse by unqualified persons can be justified in some cases.  However, our evolving collective understanding of data sharing practices when large scale datasets are involved can tend to result in unnecessary burden on the research(ers) that is actually counterproductive and may not necessarily make the patient or researcher any safer.  The following pages can help guide decision making and actions to successfully share and manage research data to allow for the most productivity and facilitation of the original research itself while balancing the data privacy and security needs of those involved.  
