_scicomputing/hutchgo_overview.md, before:

---
title: Hutch Globus Online - HutchGO
last_modified_at: 2024-07-01
primary_reviewers: atombaby
---

Globus is a non-profit service of the University of Chicago.  It is a combination of software (the Globus server and client tools) and services (the Globus control services) providing a number of different functions useful in research- data transfer, compute, and automation.

HutchGO- Hutch Globus Online- is a deployment of the Globus data transfer services for the Hutch research community. HutchGO can be used for moving data within the Hutch and to make data available to external collaborators.  Via HutchGO you can move data between storage platforms and share data with internal and external collaborators without creating new accounts, changing storage groups, or moving data.

HutchGO is available for the advancement of the Hutch's mission.  There is no charge for Globus services.

## Key Concepts

### The Globus Identity

As part of its services, Globus operates an _identity_ service.  Each individual who uses Globus has a Globus ID.  A Globus ID can be accessed by authenticating using a number of different sources- an institutional login (e.g. our Hutch O365 login), ORCID, Google account, or GitHub login can all be used to authenticate to your Globus ID.  You can have multiple login sources connected to the same Globus ID.

> NOTE: while a single Globus ID can be linked to many different authentication sources, most of the operations described here require you to log into Globus with your HutchNet ID.  Logging into Globus with your ORCID will not get you access to the same resources as logging in with your "@fredhutch.org" institutional account.

### Collections 

Central to the use of Globus is the _collection_- a collection of paths to data on the underlying storage gateway. Data is transferred between collections.  Policies (like who can access data via Globus, how paths are shared, etc) are set on the collection.

There are two kinds of collections- _mapped_ and _guest_.  A mapped collection requires that you have a HutchNet ID and that your HutchNet ID has access to the storage systems underneath Globus.  Your login to Globus is _mapped_ to a HutchNet ID on the storage system.

> For example, if I have logged into Globus using my "mrg@fredhutch.org" institutional account and I access a collection that provides access to Fast file, I will only have the access privileges that my user account has on Fast.  In the mapped collection, Globus provides no "extra" privileges.

In addition to mapped collections we have _guest_ collections.  Guest does not mean anonymous access- a guest collection allows external Globus users to access data _as you_ on the storage configured in the guest collection.  For that external user to access the data shared in a guest collection they must have a Globus ID, the guest collection must allow that ID to access the data, and your HutchNetID must have access to the storage on the back-end.

> It is possible to enable public access to a collection, but "public" only means anyone with a Globus ID.  A Globus login is still required to access the collection's data

### Roles for HutchGO Users

Because Globus allows easy sharing of data and because we want to have the individual labs to have as much control as possible over how data is shared,  we are creating specialized roles that control access to the various Globus capabilities.  Taking on a role means having a basic level of knowledge about how Globus works, constraints and controls necessary for the data being shared, and accepting responsibility for ongoing maintenance of data sharing within Globus.

The Globus service is a partnership between research labs and SciComp.  We are here to support, maintain, and inform but ultimately labs are responsible for maintaining their Globus features.

#### Data Owner

The data owner for a lab or project handles delegation of other roles to other lab staff (if needed).  Changes to the manager role needs to come from the owner.

In most cases, the lab PI is the data owner.

#### Data Managers

Data Managers have nearly full control over data sharing within Globus.  These individuals will manage guest collections, request updates to configuration of the mapped collections, and will monitor and respond to communications from SciComp about management of Globus.

#### Data Users

If a mapped collection is marked private an additional role- the data user- is required.  Only individuals with this role (or a more privileged role) will be able to see and use a private mapped collection

## Access

HutchGO is available for all Hutch researchers and staff to use for data transfer needs in furtherance of the Hutch's mission. At this time HutchGO is not to be used to access or share covered (clinic) data.

### Getting Set Up

Getting your data set up to be accessible via Globus starts with an email to scicomp with the folowing information:

 - who is the data owner (where it's not a lab PI)
 - who are the data managers
 - should the mapped collection be public or private
 - which data sources should be made available via Globus- fast, scratch, economy, temp, etc.

After this, the data owner and managers will be given links to information about creating guest collections for collaborations and signed up for notices about the Globus services.

Meanwhile SciComp will set up the Globus collection for the lab/project according to the specifications above.  SciComp will also create the groups for the various roles and assign the appropriate person(s) to those groups.  This will make data available to lab staff via their HutchNet ID.

## Sharing Data

Once the base mapped collection has been created, data managers will be able to create guest collections to share data internally and externally.  Once a path within a collection has been shared, those with access will be able to access the data _as you_.  Thus you must be sure that _you_ have access to the data being shared.  When sharing data there are options to configure read-write or read-only access.  The former is required for data upload, the latter will only allow download.  See [this documentation](/scicomputing/hutchgo_guest_collection) for details on creating the guest collection.

Your collaborator must have a Globus endpoint- this can be either a full endpoint (like we have here) or they can use Globus Connect Personal.  Connect Personal allows them to access the data you've shared and download using the workstation where they've installed Connect Personal.

Globus Connect Personal is free and is available for Linux, OSX (Mac), and Windows. The host must have outbound connectivity, but inbound firewall rules are not necessary for Connect Personal.  Connect Personal cannot be used for sharing data.


## Monitoring and Management

SciComp will provide (via email) monthly reports for each of the collections within the purview of the data owners and managers.  The owners and managers should use this information to regularly audit their collections to make sure that the collections are needed and that the collections have the appropriate access permissions.

Commit message:

Updates around permissions
 - add larger discussion about permissions and accedd
 - rename section "access" to "availability" to differentiate from permissions
 and access section earlier in the doc
 - remove earlier discussions of permissions

_scicomputing/hutchgo_overview.md, after:

---
title: Hutch Globus Online - HutchGO
last_modified_at: 2024-07-01
primary_reviewers: atombaby
---

Globus is a non-profit service of the University of Chicago.  It is a combination of software (the Globus server and client tools) and services (the Globus control services) providing a number of different functions useful in research- data transfer, compute, and automation.

HutchGO- Hutch Globus Online- is a deployment of the Globus data transfer services for the Hutch research community. HutchGO can be used for moving data within the Hutch and to make data available to external collaborators.  Via HutchGO you can move data between storage platforms and share data with internal and external collaborators without creating new accounts, changing storage groups, or moving data.

HutchGO is available for the advancement of the Hutch's mission.  There is no charge for Globus services.

## Key Concepts

### The Globus Identity

As part of its services, Globus operates an _identity_ service.  Each individual who uses Globus has a Globus ID.  A Globus ID can be accessed by authenticating using a number of different sources- an institutional login (e.g. our Hutch O365 login), ORCID, Google account, or GitHub login can all be used to authenticate to your Globus ID.  You can have multiple login sources connected to the same Globus ID.

> NOTE: while a single Globus ID can be linked to many different authentication sources, most of the operations described here require you to log into Globus with your HutchNet ID.  Logging into Globus with your ORCID will not get you access to the same resources as logging in with your "@fredhutch.org" institutional account.

### Collections 

Central to the use of Globus is the _collection_- a collection of paths to data on the underlying storage gateway. Data is transferred between collections.  Policies (like who can access data via Globus, how paths are shared, etc) are set on the collection.

There are two kinds of collections- _mapped_ and _guest_.  A mapped collection requires that you have a HutchNet ID and that your HutchNet ID has access to the storage systems underneath Globus.  Your login to Globus is _mapped_ to a HutchNet ID on the storage system by stripping off the "@fredhutch.org" portion of your email address.

Guest collections are used to share data (internally and externally).  Guest does not mean anonymous access- a guest collection allows Globus users to access data _as you_ on the storage configured in the guest collection.  For that user to access the data shared in a guest collection they must have a Globus ID, the guest collection must allow that ID to access the data, and your HutchNetID must have access to the storage on the back-end (see [Permissions and Access](#Permissions and Access) below.

>NOTE: It is possible to enable public access to a collection, but "public" only means anyone with a Globus ID.  A Globus login is still required to access the collection's data

> NOTE: You can also create a guest collection to share data with other Hutch staff.  Guest collections are not limited to non-Hutch staff.

### Roles for HutchGO Users

Because Globus allows easy sharing of data and because we want to have the individual labs to have as much control as possible over how data is shared,  we are creating specialized roles that control access to the various Globus capabilities.  Taking on a role means having a basic level of knowledge about how Globus works, constraints and controls necessary for the data being shared, and accepting responsibility for ongoing maintenance of data sharing within Globus.

The Globus service is a partnership between research labs and SciComp.  We are here to support, maintain, and inform but ultimately labs are responsible for maintaining their Globus features.

#### Data Owner

The data owner for a lab or project handles delegation of other roles to other lab staff (if needed).  Changes to the manager role needs to come from the owner.

In most cases, the lab PI is the data owner.

#### Data Managers

Data Managers have nearly full control over data sharing within Globus.  These individuals will manage guest collections, request updates to configuration of the mapped collections, and will monitor and respond to communications from SciComp about management of Globus.

#### Data Users

If a mapped collection is marked private an additional role- the data user- is required.  Only individuals with this role (or a more privileged role) will be able to see and use a private mapped collection

### Permissions and Access Control

There are multiple layers where access to files and data are enforced.

#### Collection Configuration

Collections (both guest and mapped) are configured with:

Root Path
:The root path controls which parts of the file system you are allowed to access via Globus

Path Restrictions
:Path restrictions configure more fine-grained access to paths inside the root path- you can configure no-access, read-only access, and read-write access on a per-directory basis within the root path

#### File System Permissions

When you connect to a mapped collection, your access is further controlled by your account's permissions on the file system.  If the underlying file system does not allow you to write into a path then you won't be able to write to files or directories via Globus.

#### Guest Permissions

When you create a guest collection, you are creating an additional layer of permissions for those configured with access to your guest collection.  Guest permissions to a collection can be read-only or read-write.

## Availability

HutchGO is available for all Hutch researchers and staff to use for data transfer needs in furtherance of the Hutch's mission. At this time HutchGO is not to be used to access or share covered (clinic) data.

### Getting Set Up

Getting your data set up to be accessible via Globus starts with an email to scicomp with the folowing information:

 - who is the data owner (where it's not a lab PI)
 - who are the data managers
 - should the mapped collection be public or private
 - which data sources should be made available via Globus- fast, scratch, economy, temp, etc.

After this, the data owner and managers will be given links to information about creating guest collections for collaborations and signed up for notices about the Globus services.

Meanwhile SciComp will set up the Globus collection for the lab/project according to the specifications above.  SciComp will also create the groups for the various roles and assign the appropriate person(s) to those groups.  This will make data available to lab staff via their HutchNet ID.

## Sharing Data

Once the base mapped collection has been created, data managers will be able to create guest collections to share data internally and externally.  Once a path within a collection has been shared, those with access will be able to access the data _as you_.  Thus you must be sure that _you_ have access to the data being shared.  When sharing data there are options to configure read-write or read-only access.  The former is required for data upload, the latter will only allow download.  See [this documentation](/scicomputing/hutchgo_guest_collection) for details on creating the guest collection.

Your collaborator must have a Globus endpoint- this can be either a full endpoint (like we have here) or they can use Globus Connect Personal.  Connect Personal allows them to access the data you've shared and download using the workstation where they've installed Connect Personal.

Globus Connect Personal is free and is available for Linux, OSX (Mac), and Windows. The host must have outbound connectivity, but inbound firewall rules are not necessary for Connect Personal.  Connect Personal cannot be used for sharing data.


## Monitoring and Management

SciComp will provide (via email) monthly reports for each of the collections within the purview of the data owners and managers.  The owners and managers should use this information to regularly audit their collections to make sure that the collections are needed and that the collections have the appropriate access permissions.
