_scicomputing/reference_overview.md, before:

---
title: Overview of Reference and Announcements
last_modified_at: 2019-04-01
primary_reviewers: vortexing
---
There are a variety of resources for training on various aspects of Bioinformatics and data skills available at the Fred Hutch, in the Seattle area as well as online resources.

## Local Training and Resources
- [fredhutch.io](http://www.fredhutch.io/) offers frequent, on campus courses on a topics such as R, python or GitHub, and information about previous and upcoming courses is on their site.  In order to sign up for courses, go to [MyHutch](https://fredhutch.okta.com/) and click on Hutch Learning to see currently available courses and register for them.  
- [Bioinformatics Shared Resources](http://sharedresources.fhcrc.org/core-facilities/computational-biology) offers consultation on a variety of issues related to experimental design and bioinformatic analysis.
- [Scientific Computing training materials](https://teams.fhcrc.org/sites/citwiki/SciComp/Training%20Materials/Forms/AllItems.aspx) (requires login), related to introduction to Unix and Gizmo, though additional, more recent, information can be see in the Computing section of this site.
- FHBig (Fred Hutch Bioinformatics Interest Group), is a Fred Hutch based community group that has created the [FHBig website](https://fredhutch.github.io/FHBig/) and maintains a [slack workspace](https://fhbig.slack.com/, now referred to as The Coop Communities Slack) to support communication about data science among staff and researchers at the Hutch.  
- [UW Biostatistics Summer Institutes](https://www.biostat.washington.edu/suminst) offer yearly intensive courses over the summers on a wide variety of topics.

## Online Learning
- [Biostar Handbook: A Beginner's Guide to Bioinformatics](https://www.biostarhandbook.com)
- [CalTech](http://work.caltech.edu/telecourse) Learning from Data
- [The Carpentries](https://carpentries.org), with lessons from [Data Carpentry](https://datacarpentry.org) and [Software Carpentry](https://software-carpentry.org/lessons/)
- [Cognitive Class](https://cognitiveclass.ai): Data science and cognitive computing courses
- [Coursera](https://www.datacamp.com), including courses on [Data Science](https://www.coursera.org/browse/data-science) and [Bioinforamtics](https://www.coursera.org/browse/life-sciences/bioinformatics)
- [CodeAcademy](http://www.codecademy.com)
- [DataCamp](https://www.datacamp.com)
- [DataQuest](https://www.dataquest.io/home)
- [edX](https://www.edx.org), including courses in [Data Analysis and Statistics](https://www.edx.org/course/subject/data-analysis-statistics) and [Bioinformatics](https://www.edx.org/learn/bioinformatics)
- [The Open Source Data Science Masters](http://datasciencemasters.org)
- [ROSALIND interactive bioinformatics problem set](http://rosalind.info/)
- [Udacity](https://www.udacity.com) has courses on [Data Science](https://www.udacity.com/courses/school-of-data-science)

Commit message:

splitting out training materials and aligning overview page with section

_scicomputing/reference_overview.md, after:

---
title: Overview of Reference and Announcements
last_modified_at: 2019-04-01
primary_reviewers: vortexing
---
The rest of this wiki provides general guidelines and approaches to working with data at Fred Hutch. This reference section includes information on where to obtain training, as well as specific step-by-step tutorials for accomplishing tasks with Hutch resources.

## [Training](/scicomputing/reference_training/)

There are many opportunities for training (courses and tutorials) and connecting with coding communities. The Fred Hutch Bioinformatics and Data Science Cooperative (The Coop) and fredhutch.io offer events and meeting groups. Additional opportunities are available elsewhere in Seattle (at UW and through Meetup.com) and online.

## [Resource library](/computingdemos/)

The Resource Library contains both links to GitHub repositories containing templates for coding projects and example code, as well as tutorials and demonstrations for accomplishing tasks with Hutch data science resources.

## [Announcements](/scicompannounce)

Scientific Computing sends email updates to their list of users about changes to software and hardware. Important announcements are also archived here.
