_scicomputing/software_R.md, before:

---
title: R and RStudio
primary_reviewers: ptvan, vortexing
---
R is a common statistical and computing language used in a variety of biomedical data analyses, visualizations and computing settings.  R itself can be downloaded to install it on your local computer from the Comprehensive R Archive Network project, or [CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/), or via the FH Center IT's Self Service Tools (on [Macs](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/u/center-it/help-desk/mac-support/jamf-pro.html) or on PCs).  Call the IT Helpdesk if you do not have permissions to install or update R on your local computer.  


## RStudio
The RStudio IDE is a free and open source, popular interface to R, which supports a number of added features including a GUI that can be customized to view aspects of your work of most importance (such as plots, files, environment variables, scripts, workspaces, etc). RStudio can be [downloaded here](https://www.rstudio.com/) and requires an installation of R itself first.  Keep in mind that updates to R/RStudio subsequently will require a two step process, one to update R itself, and the other to update the interface to R, RStudio.  

RStudio has a few particularly useful features:
- Support for R Markdowns/Notebooks
- Integration with git or SVN
- Concurrent views of code, plots, files, and environment variables with customized panels.  
- Direct deployment of Shiny apps via Shinyapps.io
- R package management and direct installation capabilities


## R Packages and Extensions
There are a number of available resources built on R that are free and open source that can greatly expand the utility of R and RStudio for research purposes.  There are currently three main sources of R packages that are of interest to a majority of the research community.  

### Bioconductor
[Bioconductor](https://bioconductor.org/) is a public repository of R bioinformatics packages. Bioconductor packages are curated for intercompatibility and grouped into [workflows](http://bioconductor.org/packages/3.7/workflows/) (eg. CyTOF, ChIP-seq, eQTL, etc...). New Bioinformatic tools often result in a submission of the corresponding packages to Bioconductor.  These are reliable, well vetted packages that undergo a rigorous process for submission.  

### CRAN
[CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org), (Comprehensive R Archive Network) is a public repository of numerous R packages along with R itself. Numerous packages are available, though packages are not vetted as heavily as Bioconductor and generally are required to successfully be built, but may not always perform reliably, or be fully documented.  

### GitHub
[GitHub](https://github.com/trending/r) hosts many open source R packages. As they are **not** vetted or peer-reviewed, these packages can be more experimental than those on CRAN or Bioconductor and thus you will want to proceed with caution. Some basic instructions on how to install packages into your local R/RStudio are included in this [vignette.](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/githubinstall/vignettes/githubinstall.html)


## Local (Desktop) Use
When using R/RStudio locally, you have the option to install a number of different packages from multiple sources.  Depending on the source of the package, you may approach downloading and installing them slightly differently but you manage the various packages installed, the versions of them as well as the version of R you are using them with.  


## Remote (`Rhino` and `Gizmo`) Use
If computing resources beyond what is available via your desktop are required, you may consider running R scripts or RStudio from the `rhinos` or `gizmo`.  When using R/RStudio on shared computing resources, different options for builds and modules are available that you can take advantage of.  `SciComp` makes pre-built modules available for researcher use in order to facilitate more reproducible and reliable use of software on the local cluster.  

### Current R Builds on `Rhino`/`Gizmo`
SciComp maintains a current list of the various builds of R available on `Gizmo` for use by researchers on the [EasyBuild site.](https://fredhutch.github.io/easybuild-life-sciences/)  Each build has different packages installed and versions of R itself, thus identifying if an existing R build matches your needs is a first step to using R on `Gizmo`.  If you do not see a build that meets your needs, then contact `scicomp` with the specific needs of your project.  


### `Rhino`
Depending on what OS is on your local computer, the steps are:
- If your local computer runs Windows, you should connect to the `Rhino`'s with [NoMachine](/scicomputing/access_methods/#nomachine-nx-access-multi-os), then launch RStudio from within NoMachine.
- If your local computer is a Mac, you should [install XQuartz and connect to Rhino](/scicomputing/access_methods/), then launch RStudio from the terminal
- If your local computer runs Linux, you simply need to connect to Rhino [with X11 forwarding](/scicomputing/access_methods/) using the `-X` flag as detailed above for Mac computers.

### `Gizmo`
From Rhino, execute the `grabnode` command and a node will be allocated on Gizmo after you selected the CPUs and number of days you need the node.


### rstudio.fredhutch.org
Hutch supported RStudio server can be accessed at [rstudio.fhcrc.org](http://rstudio.fhcrc.org) from computers connected to the Hutch network. For more information about using it, please contact `scicomp`.

### Run RStudio Server on an HPC machine

There is a wrapper script that allows you to run RStudio Server (the web-browser-based version of RStudio)
on the HPC machines (cluster machines whose names start with `gizmo`).

You can run this with any version of `R` that is available on our shared computing systems.

Here are the steps to run this wrapper. 

* Grab a node using the [grabnode](/scicomputing/compute_platforms/#gizmo-and-beagle-cluster) command. Specify how many CPUs and how much memory you want, and
how many days you want to have control of the node.
Remember that you can launch `slurm` jobs within
RStudio, so you may not need to ask for a lot of
computing power for your RStudio machine.
* Once you are on the node you grabbed, choose
  a version of `R` by using the [module load](/scicomputing/compute_environments/#how-to-use-environment-modules) command (`ml` for short). (Example: `ml R/3.6.1-foss-2016b`).
* Run the `launch_rstudio_server` command. This will spit out a URL that you can paste into your browser. (This URL only works inside the Hutch network, so you need to be on campus or using VPN.)
* In your browser, log into RStudio using your HutchNet ID and password.
* When you are finished using RStudio Server, you can 
terminate it by typing this command on the node you "grabbed" (the same machine where you launched RStudio Server): `launch_rstudio_server --kill` 
* Alternatively, you can just wait for your `grabnode` allocation (the number of days you specified when grabbing the node) to expire, and RStudio Server will become unavailable after that.
* If you need RStudio Server again, just repeat these steps.

*Note*: If you are working with RMarkdown documents in RStudio Server,
you may find that plot labels and other graphics look kind of weird.
This is because X11 (the X Window System) is not available
inside RStudio Server. The solution is to make the the `Cairo`
package is installed, and put the following line at the beginning of your first 
code chunk. This should cause plots and other graphics to render
correctly without need for X11.

```r
knitr::opts_chunk$set(dev="CairoPNG")
```



## The Tidyverse
The [Tidyverse](https://www.tidyverse.org/) is a group of R packages that coordinate together and are commonly used for manipulating and  visualizing data in data science applications.  There are a number of useful packages for research based users that are part of the Tidyverse, and it's worth the time to learn about them and see how one might employ them to clean, analyze and convey data and results.  DataCamp has an online [Introduction to the Tidyverse](https://www.datacamp.com/courses/introduction-to-the-tidyverse) that can be useful when first evaluating whether these packages might be useful.  

## Shiny
[Shiny](https://shiny.rstudio.com/) is an R package bundled with RStudio that enables the creation of interactive applications powered by R code. These apps can be viewed on any computer running RStudio, or they can be hosted on a server. Scicomp provides instructions for hosting Shiny apps [here](https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/compdemos/shiny/).

## Local resources
- [Seattle useR group](http://www.meetup.com/Seattle-useR/)
- [Cascadia RConf](https://cascadiarconf.com/), a local yearly conference

Commit message:

cromwell plus more easybuild work

_scicomputing/software_R.md, after:

---
title: R and RStudio
primary_reviewers: ptvan, vortexing
---
R is a common statistical and computing language used in a variety of biomedical data analyses, visualizations and computing settings.  R itself can be downloaded to install it on your local computer from the Comprehensive R Archive Network project, or [CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/), or via the FH Center IT's Self Service Tools (on [Macs](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/u/center-it/help-desk/mac-support/jamf-pro.html) or on PCs).  Call the IT Helpdesk if you do not have permissions to install or update R on your local computer.  


## RStudio
The RStudio IDE is a free and open source, popular interface to R, which supports a number of added features including a GUI that can be customized to view aspects of your work of most importance (such as plots, files, environment variables, scripts, workspaces, etc). RStudio can be [downloaded here](https://www.rstudio.com/) and requires an installation of R itself first.  Keep in mind that updates to R/RStudio subsequently will require a two step process, one to update R itself, and the other to update the interface to R, RStudio.  

RStudio has a few particularly useful features:
- Support for R Markdowns/Notebooks
- Integration with git or SVN
- Concurrent views of code, plots, files, and environment variables with customized panels.  
- Direct deployment of Shiny apps via Shinyapps.io
- R package management and direct installation capabilities


## R Packages and Extensions
There are a number of available resources built on R that are free and open source that can greatly expand the utility of R and RStudio for research purposes.  There are currently three main sources of R packages that are of interest to a majority of the research community.  

### Bioconductor
[Bioconductor](https://bioconductor.org/) is a public repository of R bioinformatics packages. Bioconductor packages are curated for intercompatibility and grouped into [workflows](http://bioconductor.org/packages/3.7/workflows/) (eg. CyTOF, ChIP-seq, eQTL, etc...). New Bioinformatic tools often result in a submission of the corresponding packages to Bioconductor.  These are reliable, well vetted packages that undergo a rigorous process for submission.  

### CRAN
[CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org), (Comprehensive R Archive Network) is a public repository of numerous R packages along with R itself. Numerous packages are available, though packages are not vetted as heavily as Bioconductor and generally are required to successfully be built, but may not always perform reliably, or be fully documented.  

### GitHub
[GitHub](https://github.com/trending/r) hosts many open source R packages. As they are **not** vetted or peer-reviewed, these packages can be more experimental than those on CRAN or Bioconductor and thus you will want to proceed with caution. Some basic instructions on how to install packages into your local R/RStudio are included in this [vignette.](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/githubinstall/vignettes/githubinstall.html)


## Local (Desktop) Use
When using R/RStudio locally, you have the option to install a number of different packages from multiple sources.  Depending on the source of the package, you may approach downloading and installing them slightly differently but you manage the various packages installed, the versions of them as well as the version of R you are using them with.  


## Remote (`Rhino` and `Gizmo`) Use
If computing resources beyond what is available via your desktop are required, you may consider running R scripts or RStudio from the `rhinos` or `gizmo`.  When using R/RStudio on shared computing resources, different options for builds and modules are available that you can take advantage of.  `SciComp` makes pre-built modules available for researcher use in order to facilitate more reproducible and reliable use of software on the local cluster.  

### Current R Modules on `Rhino`/`Gizmo`
SciComp maintains a current list of the various builds of R available on `Gizmo` for use by researchers on the [EasyBuild site.](https://fredhutch.github.io/easybuild-life-sciences/)  Each build has different packages installed and versions of R itself, thus identifying if an existing R build matches your needs is a first step to using R on `Gizmo`.  Specific information about which R Modules are available, including more information about packages installed in them can be found on our dedicated [R Module page](/rModules/). If you do not see the software you are looking for, email `scicomp` to request it or add your own GitHub issue in the [easybuild-life-sciences repo](https://github.com/FredHutch/easybuild-life-sciences).  Either way, please be specific about the source and version of the software you are interested in.  


### `Rhino`
Depending on what OS is on your local computer, the steps are:
- If your local computer runs Windows, you should connect to the `Rhino`'s with [NoMachine](/scicomputing/access_methods/#nomachine-nx-access-multi-os), then launch RStudio from within NoMachine.
- If your local computer is a Mac, you should [install XQuartz and connect to Rhino](/scicomputing/access_methods/), then launch RStudio from the terminal
- If your local computer runs Linux, you simply need to connect to Rhino [with X11 forwarding](/scicomputing/access_methods/) using the `-X` flag as detailed above for Mac computers.

### `Gizmo`
From Rhino, execute the `grabnode` command and a node will be allocated on Gizmo after you selected the CPUs and number of days you need the node.


### rstudio.fredhutch.org
Hutch supported RStudio server can be accessed at [rstudio.fhcrc.org](http://rstudio.fhcrc.org) from computers connected to the Hutch network. For more information about using it, please contact `scicomp`.

### Run RStudio Server on an HPC machine

There is a wrapper script that allows you to run RStudio Server (the web-browser-based version of RStudio)
on the HPC machines (cluster machines whose names start with `gizmo`).

You can run this with any version of `R` that is available on our shared computing systems.

Here are the steps to run this wrapper.

* Grab a node using the [grabnode](/scicomputing/compute_platforms/#gizmo-and-beagle-cluster) command. Specify how many CPUs and how much memory you want, and
how many days you want to have control of the node.
Remember that you can launch `slurm` jobs within
RStudio, so you may not need to ask for a lot of
computing power for your RStudio machine.
* Once you are on the node you grabbed, choose
  a version of `R` by using the [module load](/scicomputing/compute_environments/#how-to-use-environment-modules) command (`ml` for short). (Example: `ml R/3.6.1-foss-2016b`).
* Run the `launch_rstudio_server` command. This will spit out a URL that you can paste into your browser. (This URL only works inside the Hutch network, so you need to be on campus or using VPN.)
* In your browser, log into RStudio using your HutchNet ID and password.
* When you are finished using RStudio Server, you can
terminate it by typing this command on the node you "grabbed" (the same machine where you launched RStudio Server): `launch_rstudio_server --kill`
* Alternatively, you can just wait for your `grabnode` allocation (the number of days you specified when grabbing the node) to expire, and RStudio Server will become unavailable after that.
* If you need RStudio Server again, just repeat these steps.

*Note*: If you are working with RMarkdown documents in RStudio Server,
you may find that plot labels and other graphics look kind of weird.
This is because X11 (the X Window System) is not available
inside RStudio Server. The solution is to make the the `Cairo`
package is installed, and put the following line at the beginning of your first
code chunk. This should cause plots and other graphics to render
correctly without need for X11.

```r
knitr::opts_chunk$set(dev="CairoPNG")
```



## The Tidyverse
The [Tidyverse](https://www.tidyverse.org/) is a group of R packages that coordinate together and are commonly used for manipulating and  visualizing data in data science applications.  There are a number of useful packages for research based users that are part of the Tidyverse, and it's worth the time to learn about them and see how one might employ them to clean, analyze and convey data and results.  DataCamp has an online [Introduction to the Tidyverse](https://www.datacamp.com/courses/introduction-to-the-tidyverse) that can be useful when first evaluating whether these packages might be useful.  

## Shiny
[Shiny](https://shiny.rstudio.com/) is an R package bundled with RStudio that enables the creation of interactive applications powered by R code. These apps can be viewed on any computer running RStudio, or they can be hosted on a server. Scicomp provides instructions for hosting Shiny apps [here](https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/compdemos/shiny/).

## Local resources
- [Seattle useR group](http://www.meetup.com/Seattle-useR/)
- [Cascadia RConf](https://cascadiarconf.com/), a local yearly conference
