_scicomputing/store_scratch.md, before:

---
title: Scratch File Service
primary_reviewers: scicomp
---

>PLEASE NOTE: the old scratch storage platform is end of life and will be retired soon. Please migrate all scripts and jobs to use [hpc/temp](store_temp.md).

>Old page left for reference but will be removed following retirement of Thorium/scratch.

The scratch file system is maintained by SciComp for temporary storage of research data during active analysis.  This is a large, high-performance storage system.  It is not designed to be as available or as robust as the _home_ or _fast_ file systems.

> Data on this platform is not backed up.  This storage is _not_ appropriate for storage of the primary or only copy of any data.

Data in _scratch_ is purged when unused: the age at which files are purged is set by the file's path in _scratch_:

| path                  | age to be purged |
| --------------------- | -----------------|
| /fh/scratch/delete10/ | 10 days          |
| /fh/scratch/delete30/ | 30 days          |
| /fh/scratch/delete90/ | 90 days          |

> Data on this platform is not backed up.  This storage is _not_ appropriate for storage of the primary or only copy of any data.

As with other SciComp supported file systems, the _scratch_ file system is available to most workstations connected to the campus network:

 - `/fh/scratch` on SciComp supported Linux systems
 - `\\center.fhcrc.org\fh\scratch` on Windows
 - `smb://center.fhcrc.org/fh/scratch` on Mac.

There are no charges to the investigator for data stored here.

> Data on this platform is not backed up.  This storage is _not_ appropriate for storage of the primary or only copy of any data.

Commit message:

Updates for scratch and working
 - include links and references for working
 - add notes about scratch retirement

_scicomputing/store_scratch.md, after:

---
title: Scratch File Service
primary_reviewers: scicomp
---

>PLEASE NOTE: the old scratch storage platform is end of life and will be retired on the 27th of April. Please migrate all scripts and jobs to use [temp](scicomputing/store_temp) or [working](scicomputing/store_working).

> Scratch is currently only accessible on the rhino nodes, via Motuz, or via a mount on your workstation.  On the 27th we will be removing that access.


>Old page left for reference but will be removed following retirement of Thorium/scratch.

The scratch file system is maintained by SciComp for temporary storage of research data during active analysis.  This is a large, high-performance storage system.  It is not designed to be as available or as robust as the _home_ or _fast_ file systems.

> Data on this platform is not backed up.  This storage is _not_ appropriate for storage of the primary or only copy of any data.

Data in _scratch_ is purged when unused: the age at which files are purged is set by the file's path in _scratch_:

| path                  | age to be purged |
| --------------------- | -----------------|
| /fh/scratch/delete10/ | 10 days          |
| /fh/scratch/delete30/ | 30 days          |
| /fh/scratch/delete90/ | 90 days          |

> Data on this platform is not backed up.  This storage is _not_ appropriate for storage of the primary or only copy of any data.

As with other SciComp supported file systems, the _scratch_ file system is available to most workstations connected to the campus network:

 - `/fh/scratch` on SciComp supported Linux systems
 - `\\center.fhcrc.org\fh\scratch` on Windows
 - `smb://center.fhcrc.org/fh/scratch` on Mac.

There are no charges to the investigator for data stored here.

> Data on this platform is not backed up.  This storage is _not_ appropriate for storage of the primary or only copy of any data.
