_scicomputing/store_working.md, before:

---
title: Working File Service
primary_reviewers: scicomp
---

The _working_ storage platform provides a location for storing research data.  It is intended to be used much like _scratch_ is today.  _Working_ is more robust than _scratch_, using technology similar to what is providing _fast_ file storage today.  There are some important things to know when keeping data in _working_:

 - _working_ is not backed up and **must not** be used as a primary data store.
 - _working_ has limits (quotas) on the amount of data stored- the base quota is 20TB
 -


> [!IMPORTANT]
> Data on this platform is not backed up.  This storage is _not_ appropriate for storage of the primary or only copy of any data.

As with other SciComp supported file systems, the _scratch_ file system is available to most workstations connected to the campus network:

 - `/fh/scratch` on SciComp supported Linux systems
 - `\\center.fhcrc.org\fh\scratch` on Windows
 - `smb://center.fhcrc.org/fh/scratch` on Mac.

> Data on this platform is not backed up.  This storage is _not_ appropriate for storage of the primary or only copy of any data.

Commit message:

Add more info about osmium

_scicomputing/store_working.md, after:

---
title: Working File Service
primary_reviewers: scicomp
---

## Overview

The _working_ storage platform provides a location for longer term storage of research data.  It is intended to be used much like _scratch_ is today.  _Working_ is more robust than _scratch_ with more redundancy built into its service.

_Working_ is not backed up and **must not** be used as a primary data store.{: .notice--warning}

As with other SciComp supported file systems, the _working_ file system is available on rhino/gizmo compute systems and to managed workstations connected to the campus network.

## Using Working Storage

_Working_ is provisioned on-request.  If your lab would like to use this storage system, please have your lab's PI email SciComp.  It is organized similar to how we have organized _fast_, _temp_, and _scratch_, with subdirectories named for the lab (e.g. `/fh/working/pi_n`)

_Working_ is available on rhino/gizmo compute nodes at the path `/fh/working`.  Mac and Windows workstations have access via smb://center.fhcrc.org/fh/working.

## Quotas 

Quotas are used to manage utilization of working.  This is a hard quota- once the limit has been reached, attempts to write to _working_ will fail.

The default quota on _working_ is 20TB.  If this is insufficient, the PI will need to send that request to SciComp.  The maximum quota available is 50TB.

## Chargebacks

The first 20TB of working storage is provided without charge.  If a lab has extended their quota, the lab will be charged 6$/TB/month for the allocated quota over the 20TB base quota.

This charge is for the quota allocated, not for how much is used.  If a lab requests an increase of the quota to 30TB, that lab will be charged 10$ every month (30TB less the 20TB base is a charge of 10TB * 6$/TB/month){: .notice--info}
