_bioinformatics/inf_index.md, before:

---
title: Bioinformatics Overview
last_modified_at: 2018-06-14
---

Bioinformatics refers to the computational analysis of raw biological
data, typically those generated within the context of a scientific experiment or
research project. One of the most rapidly expanding and heavily
used application of bioinformatics is genomic sequence analysis,
in which some form of high-throughput, large scale data collection instrument
(such as a genome sequencer or a DNA microarray) is used to collect
a large amount of information about such biological entities as
genes, organisms, transcripts, etc.  Large scale data generation approaches like this can be referred to as molecular profiling, and can be applied to a variety of biological and biomedical research contexts from model organism studies (e.g., yeast strains) to human specimens in the context of a clinical assay.  

## Best Practices for Research Data Management

- Data Storage
- Data Ingestion and Public Datasets
- Data Archiving
- Data Privacy and Security

## Programming and Bioinformatics

- R, RStudio
- Bioconductor
- Python and the Condas
- Unix/Bash
- Other Common Languages

## Working with Compute Resources

- Docker
- AWS Batch

## Training and How-To's

- How-To's Collection
- Human Genetic Variant Calling and Analysis
- Gene Expression and Transcript Analysis
- Microbiome Analysis and Microbial Genomics
- Traditional GWAS
- Mammalian Copy Number Analysis

Commit message:

update all links on overview pages

_bioinformatics/inf_index.md, after:

---
title: Bioinformatics Overview
last_modified_at: 2018-06-14
---

Bioinformatics refers to the computational analysis of raw biological
data, typically those generated within the context of a scientific experiment or
research project. One of the most rapidly expanding and heavily
used application of bioinformatics is genomic sequence analysis,
in which some form of high-throughput, large scale data collection instrument
(such as a genome sequencer or a DNA microarray) is used to collect
a large amount of information about such biological entities as
genes or transcripts, etc.  Large scale data generation approaches like this can be referred to as molecular profiling, and can be applied to a variety of biological and biomedical research contexts from model organism studies (e.g., yeast strains) to human specimens in the context of a clinical assay.  

## [Best Practices for Research Data Management]({{ site.baseurl }}/bioinformatics/dm_overview/)

- [Data Storage]({{ site.baseurl }}/bioinformatics/dm_storage/)
- [Data Ingestion and Public Datasets]({{ site.baseurl }}/bioinformatics/dm_ingest/)
- [Data Archiving]({{ site.baseurl }}/bioinformatics/dm_archive/)
- [Data Privacy and Security]({{ site.baseurl }}/bioinformatics/dm_privacy/)

## [Programming and Bioinformatics]({{ site.baseurl }}/bioinformatics/prog_overview/)

- [R, RStudio]({{ site.baseurl }}/bioinformatics/prog_R/)
- [Python]({{ site.baseurl }}/bioinformatics/prog_python/)
- [Unix/Bash and Other Common Languages]({{ site.baseurl }}/bioinformatics/prog_unixbash/)

## [Managing Code and Computing]({{ site.baseurl }}/bioinformatics/compute_overview/)

- [Overview of Compute Resources]({{ site.baseurl }}/bioinformatics/compute_resoverview/)
- [Accessing Compute Resources]({{ site.baseurl }}/bioinformatics/compute_accessing/)
- [GitHub, Versioning and Sharing]({{ site.baseurl }}/bioinformatics/compute_github/)
- [Notebooks and UIs]({{ site.baseurl }}/bioinformatics/compute_uis/)
- [Docker]({{ site.baseurl }}/bioinformatics/compute_docker/)


## [Training and How-To's](({{ site.baseurl }}/bioinformatics/howto_training/))

- [Training Opportunities](({{ site.baseurl }}/bioinformatics/howto_training/))
- [Research Topic Articles]({{ site.baseurl }}/infdemos/)
