_bioinformatics/prog_unixbash.md, before:

---
title: Other Programming Languages Common in Bioinformatics
last_modified_at: 2018-11-08
---

## Shell scripting
During the course of your work you may need to do a simple task on a large number of files, like renaming all the files from a sequencing run, or raising the contrast on microscopy images. Performing these tasks on individual files by hand is time-consuming and prone to errors. Unix, Mac OSX and Windows all have simple *shell scripting* programming languages built-in for these small repetitive tasks require simple logic

The benefits of shell scripting are:
1. not needing to install additional software on your computer and,
2. ease of use.
Most Unix-based systems (eg. [Ubuntu](https://www.ubuntu.com)) come with the Bourn Again SHell ("Bash"), which are also standard on Mac OSX systems. Windows have the Command Prompt and PowerShell. You can enter shell scripting commands directly via a *command line interface* or save these commands in a *shell script* to be run immediately non-interactively.

### Shell scripting resources
- A gentle introduction to command line interface and related concepts are [here](https://launchschool.com/books/command_line/read/command_line_interface).
- Some basic Bash commands can be found [here](https://whatbox.ca/wiki/Bash_Shell_Commands).
- Slightly more advanced Bash scripting are found [here](http://tldp.org/HOWTO/Bash-Prog-Intro-HOWTO.html).
- [Common Bash pitfalls](http://mywiki.wooledge.org/BashPitfalls) goes into more subtle, advanced usage
- Overview of [Windows PowerShell](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/administration/windows-commands/powershell) and an example [comparing Command Prompt and PowerShell](https://www.windowscentral.com/how-rename-multiple-files-bulk-windows-10#rename_filename_powershell).

## Julia
The [Julia](https://docs.julialang.org) language aims to combine the accessible syntax of R or Python with the speed of C/C++ programs. While not currently as functional as R or Python for bioinformatic tasks, there is a growing collection of resources for [Julia for bioinformatics](http://ucidatascienceinitiative.github.io/IntroToJulia/).

## Go
Go, or [GoLang](https://golang.org/doc/) also has some [support for data science](https://blog.chewxy.com/2017/11/02/go-for-data-science/).

>NOTE: This article is a work in progress. If you have suggestions or would like to contribute email `sciwiki`.

Commit message:

update add bit on Perl
Added a small bit on Perl if folks have any comments or want to expand on.

_bioinformatics/prog_unixbash.md, after:

---
title: Other Programming Languages Common in Bioinformatics
last_modified_at: 2018-11-08
---

## Shell scripting
During the course of your work you may need to do a simple task on a large number of files, like renaming all the files from a sequencing run, or raising the contrast on microscopy images. Performing these tasks on individual files by hand is time-consuming and prone to errors. Unix, Mac OSX and Windows all have simple *shell scripting* programming languages built-in for these small repetitive tasks require simple logic

The benefits of shell scripting are:
1. not needing to install additional software on your computer and,
2. ease of use.
Most Unix-based systems (eg. [Ubuntu](https://www.ubuntu.com)) come with the Bourn Again SHell ("Bash"), which are also standard on Mac OSX systems. Windows have the Command Prompt and PowerShell. You can enter shell scripting commands directly via a *command line interface* or save these commands in a *shell script* to be run immediately non-interactively.

### Shell scripting resources
- A gentle introduction to command line interface and related concepts are [here](https://launchschool.com/books/command_line/read/command_line_interface).
- Some basic Bash commands can be found [here](https://whatbox.ca/wiki/Bash_Shell_Commands).
- Slightly more advanced Bash scripting are found [here](http://tldp.org/HOWTO/Bash-Prog-Intro-HOWTO.html).
- [Common Bash pitfalls](http://mywiki.wooledge.org/BashPitfalls) goes into more subtle, advanced usage
- Overview of [Windows PowerShell](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/administration/windows-commands/powershell) and an example [comparing Command Prompt and PowerShell](https://www.windowscentral.com/how-rename-multiple-files-bulk-windows-10#rename_filename_powershell).

## Julia
The [Julia](https://docs.julialang.org) language aims to combine the accessible syntax of R or Python with the speed of C/C++ programs. While not currently as functional as R or Python for bioinformatic tasks, there is a growing collection of resources for [Julia for bioinformatics](http://ucidatascienceinitiative.github.io/IntroToJulia/).

## Go
Go, or [GoLang](https://golang.org/doc/) also has some [support for data science](https://blog.chewxy.com/2017/11/02/go-for-data-science/).

## Perl 
[Perl](https://www.perl.org) is a computational language often found in bioinformatic analyses. The language was originally developed in 1987. [perl.org](https://www.perl.org/learn.html) has numerous tutorials. 

>NOTE: This article is a work in progress. If you have suggestions or would like to contribute email `sciwiki`.
