# Overview of Clinical Covariates and Specimen Banking
The particular covariates that will be associated with large scale data sets that are part of a study typically come from clinical or laboratory data. When these data are originating from human samples, certain protections need to be in place to ensure patient privacy, but also there are resources at the Fred Hutch which can help researchers effectively manage these data so that they can be associated with downstream molecular data sets more consistently and securely.  

The data dictionary being used in the Translational Genomics Data Commons can be [viewed here](https://translationalgenomics.fredhutch.org/annotations.html){:target="_blank"}<!--_--> as it is expanded and developed to reflect the contributions of more participants.  We have developed a data management system that uses modules that are discussed in the associated pages and can facilitate data management via collaboration.  Email Amy Paguirigan to set up an evaluation to see if our system can meet your needs.  

## Clinical Covariates
More to come, though we intend to describe in more depth what data management systems are available to Fred Hutch researchers, to access and interpret clinical data for a select cohort.  The ability to identify if there are suitable biospecimens associated with that cohort available via collaboration with other researchers or via a specimen repository is critical to being able to then generate large scale data sets associated with those patient phenotypes. There are multiple groups involved in the data access and management of clinically originating data, including the Hutch Data Commonwealth (HDC) and the Seattle Tumor Translational Research group (STTR).  The current recommendations and descriptions of available resources for this work will be described here.  The current specimens with associated clinical covariates that are already part of the Translational Genomics Data Commons can be queried directly at [this link,](https://translationalgenomics.fredhutch.org/cohorts.html){:target="_blank"}<!--_-->

## Specimen Banking
More to come, though we intend to describe the best practices for using the software LabMatrix for prospective specimen banking and laboratory organization of retrospectively banked human specimens.  
