_hdc/workflows/workflow_catalog.md, before:

---
title: Workflow Catalog
hdc: True
---

The Hutch Data Core works to support researchers by providing access to a set of
curated bioinformatics workflows which automate commonly-needed tasks.

We are in the process of expanding this catalog of workflows, and we are
**actively soliciting input** from researchers who have an interest in
adding workflow automation to their ongoing projects.

Because of our extensive work with the Microbiome Research Initiative,
many of the workflows listed below are designed for the analysis of microbial sequence
data. However, the goal of this catalog is to be comprehensive and not specific to
any single scientific domain.

If you are interested in adding a workflow to this catalog which meets your needs,
please don't hesitate to [get in touch](mailto:sminot@fredhutch.org).

## Workflow Support

By including a workflow in this catalog, the Data Core is committed to helping
individual researchers as they implement the workflow on their own datasets. This
may include consultation on the proper use of a workflow, helping to set up an initial
test run, as well as troubleshooting errors which may come up. By creating a catalog
of well-supported workflows, we hope to streamline the data analysis process for
future researchers who will be able to take advantage of the enhanced documentation
and debugging that results from our efforts.

Please [reach out](mailto:sminot@fredhutch.org) if you have questions about the
use of any workflows listed below, or would like to see an additional use-case supported.

## Workflows

Each of the workflows below have a short description and a link to the repository
which should contain documentation on how to run the workflow. If any of these materials
are insufficient, we are extremely interested in working to make improvements and
would [appreciate your feedback](mailto:sminot@fredhutch.org).

### ccs-nf

Purpose: Extract CCS from CLR data generated by the PacBio Sequel instrument
Homepage: [https://github.com/FredHutch/ccs-nf](https://github.com/FredHutch/ccs-nf)

## geneshot

Purpose: Perform gene-level metagenomic analysis of WGS datasets for strain-level microbiome analysis
Homepage: [https://github.com/Golob-Minot/geneshot](https://github.com/Golob-Minot/geneshot)

### multi-fastqc-nf

Purpose: Generate a QC summary over a collection of FASTQ input files
Homepage: [https://github.com/FredHutch/multi-fastqc-nf](https://github.com/FredHutch/multi-fastqc-nf)

### nf-anvio-pangenome

Purpose: Analyze a set of microbial genomes with the [anvi'o](https://github.com/merenlab/anvio) pangenome pipeline
Homepage: [https://github.com/FredHutch/nf-anvio-pangenome](https://github.com/FredHutch/nf-anvio-pangenome)

## PGAP-nf

Purpose: Annotate a set of bacterial genomes using the
[PGAP annotation software suite](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/annotation_prok/)
Homepage: [https://github.com/FredHutch/PGAP-nf](https://github.com/FredHutch/PGAP-nf)

## prokka-nf

Purpose: Annotate a set of bacterial genomes using the
[Prokka annotation software suite](https://github.com/tseemann/prokka)
Homepage: [https://github.com/FredHutch/prokka-nf](https://github.com/FredHutch/prokka-nf)

## unicycler-nf

Purpose: Perform _de novo_ assembly of bacterial genomes using the [UniCycler](https://github.com/rrwick/Unicycler) hybrid assembler
Homepage: [https://github.com/FredHutch/unicycler-nf](https://github.com/FredHutch/unicycler-nf)

Commit message:

Adding Cellprofiler to the HDC workflow catalog

_hdc/workflows/workflow_catalog.md, after:

---
title: Workflow Catalog
hdc: True
---

The Hutch Data Core works to support researchers by providing access to a set of
curated bioinformatics workflows which automate commonly-needed tasks.

We are in the process of expanding this catalog of workflows, and we are
**actively soliciting input** from researchers who have an interest in
adding workflow automation to their ongoing projects.

Because of our extensive work with the Microbiome Research Initiative,
many of the workflows listed below are designed for the analysis of microbial sequence
data. However, the goal of this catalog is to be comprehensive and not specific to
any single scientific domain.

If you are interested in adding a workflow to this catalog which meets your needs,
please don't hesitate to [get in touch](mailto:sminot@fredhutch.org).

## Workflow Support

By including a workflow in this catalog, the Data Core is committed to helping
individual researchers as they implement the workflow on their own datasets. This
may include consultation on the proper use of a workflow, helping to set up an initial
test run, as well as troubleshooting errors which may come up. By creating a catalog
of well-supported workflows, we hope to streamline the data analysis process for
future researchers who will be able to take advantage of the enhanced documentation
and debugging that results from our efforts.

Please [reach out](mailto:sminot@fredhutch.org) if you have questions about the
use of any workflows listed below, or would like to see an additional use-case supported.

## Workflows

Each of the workflows below have a short description and a link to the repository
which should contain documentation on how to run the workflow. If any of these materials
are insufficient, we are extremely interested in working to make improvements and
would [appreciate your feedback](mailto:sminot@fredhutch.org).

### ccs-nf

Purpose: Extract CCS from CLR data generated by the PacBio Sequel instrument
Homepage: [https://github.com/FredHutch/ccs-nf](https://github.com/FredHutch/ccs-nf)

### cellprofiler-batch-nf

Purpose: Process images in parallel through a CellProfiler pipeline and combine the results
Homepage: [https://github.com/FredHutch/cellprofiler-batch-nf](https://github.com/FredHutch/cellprofiler-batch-nf)

## geneshot

Purpose: Perform gene-level metagenomic analysis of WGS datasets for strain-level microbiome analysis
Homepage: [https://github.com/Golob-Minot/geneshot](https://github.com/Golob-Minot/geneshot)

### multi-fastqc-nf

Purpose: Generate a QC summary over a collection of FASTQ input files
Homepage: [https://github.com/FredHutch/multi-fastqc-nf](https://github.com/FredHutch/multi-fastqc-nf)

### nf-anvio-pangenome

Purpose: Analyze a set of microbial genomes with the [anvi'o](https://github.com/merenlab/anvio) pangenome pipeline
Homepage: [https://github.com/FredHutch/nf-anvio-pangenome](https://github.com/FredHutch/nf-anvio-pangenome)

## PGAP-nf

Purpose: Annotate a set of bacterial genomes using the
[PGAP annotation software suite](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/annotation_prok/)
Homepage: [https://github.com/FredHutch/PGAP-nf](https://github.com/FredHutch/PGAP-nf)

## prokka-nf

Purpose: Annotate a set of bacterial genomes using the
[Prokka annotation software suite](https://github.com/tseemann/prokka)
Homepage: [https://github.com/FredHutch/prokka-nf](https://github.com/FredHutch/prokka-nf)

## unicycler-nf

Purpose: Perform _de novo_ assembly of bacterial genomes using the [UniCycler](https://github.com/rrwick/Unicycler) hybrid assembler
Homepage: [https://github.com/FredHutch/unicycler-nf](https://github.com/FredHutch/unicycler-nf)
