_computing/comp_index.md, before:

---
title: Overview of Computing at Fred Hutch
last_modified_at: 2019-02-19
---
Center IT supports a wide array of resources made available to researchers.  Much of the basic computing information needed on an ongoing basis can be found via Centernet and the Center IT pages.  However, much of the scientific computing resource documentation beyond this material is provided in this section of the Wiki, and links to existing resources and documentation are provided when available.  

We maintain a space for both announcements from Scientific Computing as well as a Resource Library at the following links:
- [Updates and Announcements]({{ site.baseurl }}/scicompannounce/)
- [Resource Library, Demo's and HOWTOs]({{ site.baseurl }}/compdemos/)

## [Access and Credentials]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/access_overview/)
This section includes a variety of information about accessing computing resources at the Fred Hutch, including managing credentials for services when required.  
- [Credentials]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/access_credentials/)
- [Methods]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/access_methods/)


## [Data Storage]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/store_overview/)
The Hutch, through Center IT and Scientific Computing, support a number of options for storing your data. The service you use to store your data will depend on the nature of the data and the anticipated use.

- [Database Systems]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/store_databases/)
- [File Storage Systems]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/store_posix/)
- [Object Storage Systems]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/store_objectstore/)
- [Temporary Storage: Scratch]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/store_scratch/)
- [Collaborative Storage Systems]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/store_collaboration/)


## [Large Scale Compute]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/cluster_overview/)
This section contains articles that describe a range of high performance computing resource options available to Fred Hutch researchers.

- [Linux Operating System]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/linux_linux101/)
- [Technologies]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/resource_overview/)
- [Scientific Software]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/cluster_software/)
- [Job Management]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/cluster_usingSlurm/)
- [Cloud Computing]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/cluster_cloudCompute/)

Commit message:

Move overview links
 - move links to overview pages into body of sections
 - remove links from section headings

_computing/comp_index.md, after:

---
title: Overview of Computing at Fred Hutch
last_modified_at: 2019-02-19
---
Center IT supports a wide array of resources made available to researchers.  Much of the basic computing information needed on an ongoing basis can be found via Centernet and the Center IT pages.  However, much of the scientific computing resource documentation beyond this material is provided in this section of the Wiki, and links to existing resources and documentation are provided when available.

We maintain a space for both announcements from Scientific Computing as well as a Resource Library at the following links:

- [Updates and Announcements]({{ site.baseurl }}/scicompannounce/)
- [Resource Library, Demo's and HOWTOs]({{ site.baseurl }}/compdemos/)

## Access and Credentials

This section includes a variety of information about accessing computing resources at the Fred Hutch, including managing credentials for services when required.  
- [Overview]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/access_overview/)
- [Credentials]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/access_credentials/)
- [Methods]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/access_methods/)


## Data Storage

The Hutch, through Center IT and Scientific Computing, support a number of options for storing your data. The service you use to store your data will depend on the nature of the data and the anticipated use.

- [Overview of Storage Options]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/store_overview/)
- [Database Systems]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/store_databases/)
- [File Storage Systems]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/store_posix/)
- [Object Storage Systems]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/store_objectstore/)
- [Temporary Storage: Scratch]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/store_scratch/)
- [Collaborative Storage Systems]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/store_collaboration/)


## Computing

This section contains articles that describe a range of high performance computing resource options available to Fred Hutch researchers.

- [Overview of Computing Options]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/cluster_overview/)
- [Linux Operating System]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/linux_linux101/)
- [Technologies]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/resource_overview/)
- [Scientific Software]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/cluster_software/)
- [Job Management]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/cluster_usingSlurm/)
- [Cloud Computing]({{ site.baseurl }}/computing/cluster_cloudCompute/)
