_computing/shiny.md, before:

---
title: Shiny
last_modified_at: 2018-06-19
---

## R Shiny Application

#### [Why Shiny App](http://zevross.com/blog/2016/04/19/r-powered-web-applications-with-shiny-a-tutorial-and-cheat-sheet-with-40-example-apps/)

> [Shiny is an R package that makes it easy to build interactive web apps straight from R. You can host standalone apps on a webpage or embed them in R Markdown documents or build dashboards. You can also extend your Shiny apps with CSS themes, htmlwidgets, and JavaScript actions.](https://shiny.rstudio.com)

####  [How to Build a Shiny App](https://shiny.rstudio.com/articles/build.html)

## Version Control Tool required to deploy your R Shiny Application to Fred Hutch deployment

A good tutorial slide deck on how to use GitHub with command line can be found [here](https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/fredhutch-docs/Introducing-Git-and-GitHub.pdf). 
- Signing up for a GitHub account - Slide 12
- How to be part of Fred Hutch GitHub Organization - Slide 13
- Creating a new GitHub Repo - Slide 14
- Cloning repository (repo) to local machine - Slide 19
- Keep your local repo up to date, in the scenario of collaboration with others or moveing to a different machine. - Slide 21
- Make change to files locally and commit the changes - Slide 23 ~ 27
- Push the local committed changes to the remote GitHub repo - Slide 28
- Collaborations internally and externally - Slide 31 ~ 43

#### [Optional] To read more about [Git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Git-Basics) and [GitHub](https://github.com)

#### [Recommended] [GitHub Desktop Application](https://desktop.github.com/)

#### Below is a step-by-step walk through of pushing your existing shiny app to your FredHutch GitHub repo.

#### Step 1. Sign up a GitHub Account

![https://github.com/join?source=header-home](/assets/shiny-app/rsz_github_signup.png)

#### Step 2. Join FredHutch GitHub Account

[According to this doc](https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/fredhutch-docs/Introducing-Git-and-GitHub.pdf)
- Fred Hutch GitHub Account open to all Fred Hutch staff
- Private repositories at no cost to you
- Should be used for all official Hutch work rather than a personal repo
- To get access:
    - Create a GitHub account if you don’t already have one
    - Send a request to <helpdesk@fredhutch.org> and provide them with your GitHub username from step 1. 
(not the email address used to register). Include you lab/department name so SciComp can
create a group to hold all the members of your team.

##### Step 3. [Get GitHub Desktop Application from this link](https://desktop.github.com/)
![](/assets/shiny-app/electro-b.png)

#### Step 4. [Using command line] Download Shiny App Template from [FredHutch/Shiny-app-template](https://github.com/FredHutch/shiny-app-template)
![](/assets/shiny-app/com-com.png)

```
    git clone https://github.com/FredHutch/shiny-app-template.git <your_app_folder>
    cd <your_app_folder>
    ls -al
    rm -rf .git
    ls -al
    git init
    echo "# <your_app_folder>" > README.md
    git add .
    git commit -m 'initial commit'
```
After the steps above from a terminal, you have achieved these steps:
- Cloned a template
- Created your own repo
- Add a new git control to this repo

Now it's time to inject your wonderful shiny app to this template. The goal is to put all your app code base to template's subfolder 'app'.  

#### Step 5. [Using GitHub Desktop Application] to track local file changes in this repo
- To keep track of file changes within a local repo, first add this folder to GitHub Desktop Application: 
    ![](/assets/shiny-app/electro-add-repo.png)
    ![](/assets/shiny-app/rsz_1electron-add-repo-2.png)

- You can create a remote repo by clicking on the 'Publish repository' and select the correct branch (in this case 'master' is the branch name). You can specify if you want this repo to be private or not. Also, please make sure this repo is under FredHutch as the organization.
![](/assets/shiny-app/electro-create-remote-repo.png)

#### Step 6. Use your favorite code editor to add your own shiny app content to this template.

Here are a few reminders for the shiny apps with a single R script: 

- Please split your app.R to ui.R and server.R according to the template app subfolder's file structure.
- Make sure you include 'library(shiny)' to both ui.R and server.R files
- In server.R, please remove 'shinyApp(ui, server)'
- You can add your data to a data folder under app folder

#### Step 7. After you added your own content to this repo, you are ready to commit the changes and push the changes to the remote repo.

- Now your GitHub Desktop Application console looks like this: 
![](/assets/shiny-app/electron-before-commit.png)

- Two files with green crosses on the right have been added as new files.
Two existing files have been modified with yellow dots on the right. 
You can further examine and adjust those changes by click the yellow dot or right click: 
![](/assets/shiny-app/electron-mod.png)

- Writea commit message and click on 'commit to master' if you want to commit change to your master branch: 
![](/assets/shiny-app/electron-com.png) 

- Push committed change from local files to remote repo
![](/assets/shiny-app/electron-push.png) 

#### Step 8. Go to GitHub FredHutch Page
- You should be able to find your apps within the repo you created under FredHutch group:
![](/assets/shiny-app/github-repo_s.png) 

- Please also add topics 'r' and 'shiny':
![](/assets/shiny-app/GitHub-add-labels-3.png) 


## Deployment Service from SciComp

You also want to be ready to answer all the questions below before you contact Scientific Computing team.  If you feel ready with your **codebase** as well as the **below information required by deployment**, contact Scientific Computing at <scicomp@fredhutch.org> to start the process of deploying your application on a server so others can access it. 

1. **a.** Is your application codebase version-controlled by Git and in a GitHub repository (repo) ? 

   **b.** If so, is it under FredHutch account? 

2. How do you want to name (DNS name) your application? So the it will look something like **<your_application_DNS_name>.fredhutch.org**

3. Is your application facing Fred Hutch **internally** or **externally**? 
    - internally means the app is open to the Fred Hutch campus
    - externally means the app is facing the entire internet 

4. Does your application require authorization (log in), that only your collaborators have access? 

5. Does your application contain PHI? Please remove PHI from your application. 

6. Please list out all the dependencies (R packages you used)

## More questions? 

- [Which GitHub protocol should I use?](https://gist.github.com/grawity/4392747)
- [Get invitation to FH Binformatic Interest Group (BIG) Slack Channel](https://join.slack.com/t/fhbig/shared_invite/enQtMzUyMDIxNzk3MDU3LWNjMDg3ZDVhNGZiNTBlODRmNWM5ZjczMzI1MGNmZTg4NGQ5ODgzMGNmMjcyNzMxMDc0YWFlN2VkNjI4NGZjNjg) to participate with Shiny App co-working group? 
- [Join FH BIG mailing list?](https://lists.fhcrc.org/mailman/listinfo/fhbig)


## More links

- [Tutorial](http://shiny.rstudio.com/tutorial/)
- [Shiny cheatsheet](http://shiny.rstudio.com/images/shiny-cheatsheet.pdf)
- [Shiny articles](http://shiny.rstudio.com/articles/)
- [Show me shiny](http://www.showmeshiny.com/.)
- [Shinyapps.io](http://www.shinyapps.io/)
- [Gallery](http://shiny.rstudio.com/gallery/google-charts.html)
- [Shiny Google User Group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/shiny-discuss)

Commit message:

added back the local testing

_computing/shiny.md, after:

---
title: Shiny
last_modified_at: 2018-06-19
---

## R Shiny Application

#### [Why Shiny App](http://zevross.com/blog/2016/04/19/r-powered-web-applications-with-shiny-a-tutorial-and-cheat-sheet-with-40-example-apps/)

> [Shiny is an R package that makes it easy to build interactive web apps straight from R. You can host standalone apps on a webpage or embed them in R Markdown documents or build dashboards. You can also extend your Shiny apps with CSS themes, htmlwidgets, and JavaScript actions.](https://shiny.rstudio.com)

####  [How to Build a Shiny App](https://shiny.rstudio.com/articles/build.html)

## Version Control Tool required to deploy your R Shiny Application to Fred Hutch deployment

A good tutorial slide deck on how to use GitHub with command line can be found [here](https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/fredhutch-docs/Introducing-Git-and-GitHub.pdf). 
- Signing up for a GitHub account - Slide 12
- How to be part of Fred Hutch GitHub Organization - Slide 13
- Creating a new GitHub Repo - Slide 14
- Cloning repository (repo) to local machine - Slide 19
- Keep your local repo up to date, in the scenario of collaboration with others or moveing to a different machine. - Slide 21
- Make change to files locally and commit the changes - Slide 23 ~ 27
- Push the local committed changes to the remote GitHub repo - Slide 28
- Collaborations internally and externally - Slide 31 ~ 43

#### [Optional] To read more about [Git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Git-Basics) and [GitHub](https://github.com)

#### [Recommended] [GitHub Desktop Application](https://desktop.github.com/)

#### Below is a step-by-step walk through of pushing your existing shiny app to your FredHutch GitHub repo.

#### Step 1. Sign up a GitHub Account

![https://github.com/join?source=header-home](/assets/shiny-app/rsz_github_signup.png)

#### Step 2. Join FredHutch GitHub Account

[According to this doc](https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/fredhutch-docs/Introducing-Git-and-GitHub.pdf)
- Fred Hutch GitHub Account open to all Fred Hutch staff
- Private repositories at no cost to you
- Should be used for all official Hutch work rather than a personal repo
- To get access:
    - Create a GitHub account if you don’t already have one
    - Send a request to <helpdesk@fredhutch.org> and provide them with your GitHub username from step 1. 
(not the email address used to register). Include you lab/department name so SciComp can
create a group to hold all the members of your team.

##### Step 3. [Get GitHub Desktop Application from this link](https://desktop.github.com/)
![](/assets/shiny-app/electro-b.png)

#### Step 4. [Using command line] Download Shiny App Template from [FredHutch/Shiny-app-template](https://github.com/FredHutch/shiny-app-template)
![](/assets/shiny-app/com-com.png)

```
    git clone https://github.com/FredHutch/shiny-app-template.git <your_app_folder>
    cd <your_app_folder>
    ls -al
    rm -rf .git
    ls -al
    git init
    echo "# <your_app_folder>" > README.md
    git add .
    git commit -m 'initial commit'
```
After the steps above from a terminal, you have achieved these steps:
- Cloned a template
- Created your own repo
- Add a new git control to this repo

Now it's time to inject your wonderful shiny app to this template. The goal is to put all your app code base to template's subfolder 'app'.  

#### Step 5. [Using GitHub Desktop Application] to track local file changes in this repo
- To keep track of file changes within a local repo, first add this folder to GitHub Desktop Application: 
    ![](/assets/shiny-app/electro-add-repo.png)
    ![](/assets/shiny-app/rsz_1electron-add-repo-2.png)

- You can create a remote repo by clicking on the 'Publish repository' and select the correct branch (in this case 'master' is the branch name). You can specify if you want this repo to be private or not. Also, please make sure this repo is under FredHutch as the organization.
![](/assets/shiny-app/electro-create-remote-repo.png)

#### Step 6. Use your favorite code editor to add your own shiny app content to this template.

Here are a few reminders for the shiny apps with a single R script: 

- Please split your app.R to ui.R and server.R according to the template app subfolder's file structure.
- Make sure you include 'library(shiny)' to both ui.R and server.R files
- In server.R, please remove 'shinyApp(ui, server)'
- You can add your data to a data folder under app folder

#### Step 7. After you added your own content to this repo, you are ready to commit the changes and push the changes to the remote repo.

- Now your GitHub Desktop Application console looks like this: 
![](/assets/shiny-app/electron-before-commit.png)

- Two files with green crosses on the right have been added as new files.
Two existing files have been modified with yellow dots on the right. 
You can further examine and adjust those changes by click the yellow dot or right click: 
![](/assets/shiny-app/electron-mod.png)

- Writea commit message and click on 'commit to master' if you want to commit change to your master branch: 
![](/assets/shiny-app/electron-com.png) 

- Push committed change from local files to remote repo
![](/assets/shiny-app/electron-push.png) 

#### Step 8. Go to GitHub FredHutch Page
- You should be able to find your apps within the repo you created under FredHutch group:
![](/assets/shiny-app/github-repo_s.png) 

- Please also add topics 'r' and 'shiny':
![](/assets/shiny-app/GitHub-add-labels-3.png) 

## Test You Application Locally
- Open an R console
![](/assets/shiny-app/r.png) 

- [R console] ``` source('start.r') ```

- Then go to browser to check http://localhost:7777

**Hopefully, you can see your app working as expected in the browser. Please keep a good record of all your dependencies. You may have all the necessary R packages installed on your local machine but SciComp deployment platform needs to know those dependencies.**

## Deployment Service from SciComp

You also want to be ready to answer all the questions below before you contact Scientific Computing team.  If you feel ready with your **codebase** as well as the **below information required by deployment**, contact Scientific Computing at <scicomp@fredhutch.org> to start the process of deploying your application on a server so others can access it. 

1. **a.** Is your application codebase version-controlled by Git and in a GitHub repository (repo) ? 

   **b.** If so, is it under FredHutch account? 

2. How do you want to name (DNS name) your application? So the it will look something like **<your_application_DNS_name>.fredhutch.org**

3. Is your application facing Fred Hutch **internally** or **externally**? 
    - internally means the app is open to the Fred Hutch campus
    - externally means the app is facing the entire internet 

4. Does your application require authorization (log in), that only your collaborators have access? 

5. Does your application contain PHI? Please remove PHI from your application. 

6. Please list out all the dependencies (R packages you used)

## More questions? 

- [Which GitHub protocol should I use?](https://gist.github.com/grawity/4392747)
- [Get invitation to FH Binformatic Interest Group (BIG) Slack Channel](https://join.slack.com/t/fhbig/shared_invite/enQtMzUyMDIxNzk3MDU3LWNjMDg3ZDVhNGZiNTBlODRmNWM5ZjczMzI1MGNmZTg4NGQ5ODgzMGNmMjcyNzMxMDc0YWFlN2VkNjI4NGZjNjg) to participate with Shiny App co-working group? 
- [Join FH BIG mailing list?](https://lists.fhcrc.org/mailman/listinfo/fhbig)


## More links

- [Tutorial](http://shiny.rstudio.com/tutorial/)
- [Shiny cheatsheet](http://shiny.rstudio.com/images/shiny-cheatsheet.pdf)
- [Shiny articles](http://shiny.rstudio.com/articles/)
- [Show me shiny](http://www.showmeshiny.com/.)
- [Shinyapps.io](http://www.shinyapps.io/)
- [Gallery](http://shiny.rstudio.com/gallery/google-charts.html)
- [Shiny Google User Group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/shiny-discuss)
