_computing/store_collaboration.md, before:

---
title: Data Storage for Collaboration
last_modified_at: 2018-10-18
primary_reviewers:
---

There are Fred Hutch supported data storage systems that allow you to share data with people outside the Hutch, with or without a Hutch ID in order to facilitate data transfer and receipt in collaborations within or outside of the Fred Hutch.  

## Aspera

The Aspera is a storage appliance that runs a heavily tuned storage server and client that enables fast transfer of large data between this system and a host using the Aspera client (either command line or via a browser).  The primary method of operation is to upload the data to the server, then use the web interface to create an email with a link you would then send to those outside the Hutch network.

> NOTE: space is limited. Because of this, data stored here is deleted after a short period of time making the Aspera inappropriate for primary storage.  Always keep the primary source on one of the other options above (fast, economy, etc.)

Visit [the Aspera information page](https://aspera.fhcrc.org/index.html) for more details and information on using this storage service.

## OneDrive

Visit the [OneDrive CenterNet page](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/u/center-it/projects/ignite/onedrive.html) for more details and information on using this storage service.

Commit message:

tweak with material from CenterNet page!

_computing/store_collaboration.md, after:

---
title: Data Storage for Collaboration
last_modified_at: 2018-10-18
primary_reviewers:
---

There are Fred Hutch supported data storage systems that allow you to share data with people outside the Hutch, with or without a Hutch ID in order to facilitate data transfer and receipt in collaborations within or outside of the Fred Hutch.  

## Aspera

The Aspera is a storage appliance that runs a heavily tuned storage server and client that enables fast transfer of large data between this system and a host using the Aspera client (either command line or via a browser).  The primary method of operation is to upload the data to the server, then use the web interface to create an email with a link you would then send to those outside the Hutch network.

> NOTE: space is limited. Because of this, data stored here is deleted after a short period of time making the Aspera inappropriate for primary storage.  Always keep the primary source on one of the other options above (fast, economy, etc.)

Visit [the Aspera information page](https://aspera.fhcrc.org/index.html) for more details and information on using this storage service.

## OneDrive
OneDrive is a cloud service that securely stores your files and folders in one place, share them with others, and update your files from any device. OneDrive is a benefit available individual users at the Fred Hutch that allows for private storage of files with the ability to share those files with others for collaboration.  With OneDrive you can:

- Create documents on your computer and edit on your laptop, phone, or tablet
- Collaborate with others in real time
- View, store and share files and folders easily
- Automatically sync files to your desktop for offline access
- Simultaneously edit shared files with other collaborators

The Fred Hutch service Office365 (which includes OneDrive) has been designed with security in mind and comes with features that help achieve compliance with regulations such as HIPAA and FISMA. With that said, the safety of your data depends not only on the design of OneDrive but also on how you use it. You also have control over more sharing options and the ability to restore a previous version of a file.  Your files are viewable only by users to whom you have granted access. Unless a file or folder has been shared, it will remain private.  Once you have installed the OneDrive application on a mobile device you will be able to upload and share documents between computers and devices as well. 

Visit the [OneDrive CenterNet page](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/u/center-it/projects/ignite/onedrive.html) for more details and information on using this storage service.
