_datascience/cbioportal.md, before:

---
title: Fred Hutch cBioPortal
authors: tefirman, sitapriyamoorthi
primary_reviewers: vortexing, abbywall
---

[**cBioPortal**](https://www.cbioportal.org/) is an open-access, open-source resource for interactive exploration of multidimensional cancer genomics data sets developed by Memorial Sloan Kettering (MSK). The Data Science Lab (DaSL) in conjunction with the Scientific Computing Group (SciComp) at Fred Hutch have integrated a Fred Hutch instance of cBioPortal for research use only. 

The [Fred Hutch deployment of cBioPortal](https://cbioportal.fredhutch.org/) provides:

- **Interim Visualization**: The Fred Hutch instance of cBioPortal allows for the visualization of clinical and genomic data both published and unpublished.
- **Facilitated Sharing**: Hosting your data enables sharing and comparison to other datasets from the Fred Hutch community and beyond.
- **Controlled Access**: Study data is restricted to authorized personnel approved by the study lead or principal investigator (PI), thus protecting your research data
- **Inclusion of Sensitive Data**: cBioportal has been reviewed and approved by InfoSec to include up to individually identifiable research data. 


## Getting Started

### Training and Courses
- Find out more about the Fred Hutch instance of cBioPortal and how to upload your study [in the DaSL Resource Library](/dasldemos/fh-cbio-intro/).
- Read more the data formats required for upload and explore a selection of tools that will help with this formatting in the Fred Hutch [cbioportal-data-formatting](https://github.com/FredHutch/cbioportal-data-formatting) repository.
- The creators of cBioPortal at [MSK](https://docs.cbioportal.org/about-us/) provide a great series of [video tutorials](https://www.youtube.com/@cbioportal) that will guide you through how to use the cBioPortal interface.


### Technical Documentation and Repositories
- [Public cBioPortal Documentation](https://docs.cbioportal.org/)
- [Fred Hutch cBioPortal GitHub Repository](https://github.com/FredHutch/cbioportal-fredhutch-automation) (contact [Taylor Firman](mailto:tfirman@fredhutch.org) for access)

## Release Notes

### September 2024
**What's New**

- Fred Hutch cBioPortal deployment with user documentation
- Updated to [v5.4.10](https://github.com/cBioPortal/cbioportal/releases/tag/v5.4.10)

**Fixes**

- No fixes yet, just releasing this product

## Contact Us
The cBioPortal team can be contacted by emailing Taylor Firman ([tfirman@fredhutch.org](mailto:tfirman@fredhutch.org)). Please feel free to schedule a [Data House Call](https://calendly.com/data-house-calls/resources) with us to go over any questions you may have.

Commit message:

Embedding Demo Day recording in cBioPortal product page

_datascience/cbioportal.md, after:

---
title: Fred Hutch cBioPortal
authors: tefirman, sitapriyamoorthi
primary_reviewers: vortexing, abbywall
---

[**cBioPortal**](https://www.cbioportal.org/) is an open-access, open-source resource for interactive exploration of multidimensional cancer genomics data sets developed by Memorial Sloan Kettering (MSK). The Data Science Lab (DaSL) in conjunction with the Scientific Computing Group (SciComp) at Fred Hutch have integrated a Fred Hutch instance of cBioPortal for research use only. 

The [Fred Hutch deployment of cBioPortal](https://cbioportal.fredhutch.org/) provides:

- **Interim Visualization**: The Fred Hutch instance of cBioPortal allows for the visualization of clinical and genomic data both published and unpublished.
- **Facilitated Sharing**: Hosting your data enables sharing and comparison to other datasets from the Fred Hutch community and beyond.
- **Controlled Access**: Study data is restricted to authorized personnel approved by the study lead or principal investigator (PI), thus protecting your research data
- **Inclusion of Sensitive Data**: cBioportal has been reviewed and approved by InfoSec to include up to individually identifiable research data. 


## Getting Started

### Training and Courses
- Find out more about the Fred Hutch instance of cBioPortal and how to upload your study [in the DaSL Resource Library](/dasldemos/fh-cbio-intro/).
- Read more the data formats required for upload and explore a selection of tools that will help with this formatting in the Fred Hutch [cbioportal-data-formatting](https://github.com/FredHutch/cbioportal-data-formatting) repository.
- The creators of cBioPortal at [MSK](https://docs.cbioportal.org/about-us/) provide a great series of [video tutorials](https://www.youtube.com/@cbioportal) that will guide you through how to use the cBioPortal interface.
- Check out the recording below of our Fred Hutch cBioPortal Demo Day demonstrating how to use cBioPortal in general, the benefits of the Fred-Hutch-specific instance, and how to safely and securely upload your own study data.

<iframe src="https://fredhutch.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Embed.aspx?id=1e1ae5d3-8b2f-4be7-acc6-b2290121babc&autoplay=false&offerviewer=true&showtitle=true&showbrand=true&captions=false&interactivity=all" height="405" width="720" style="border: 1px solid #464646;" allowfullscreen allow="autoplay" aria-label="Panopto Embedded Video Player" aria-description="FredHutchcBioPortalDemoDay_111424" ></iframe>


### Technical Documentation and Repositories
- [Public cBioPortal Documentation](https://docs.cbioportal.org/)
- [Fred Hutch cBioPortal GitHub Repository](https://github.com/FredHutch/cbioportal-fredhutch-automation) (contact [Taylor Firman](mailto:tfirman@fredhutch.org) for access)

## Release Notes

### September 2024
**What's New**

- Fred Hutch cBioPortal deployment with user documentation
- Updated to [v5.4.10](https://github.com/cBioPortal/cbioportal/releases/tag/v5.4.10)

**Fixes**

- No fixes yet, just releasing this product

## Contact Us
The cBioPortal team can be contacted by emailing Taylor Firman ([tfirman@fredhutch.org](mailto:tfirman@fredhutch.org)). Please feel free to schedule a [Data House Call](https://calendly.com/data-house-calls/resources) with us to go over any questions you may have.
