---
title: Data Use and Material Transfer Agreements
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

Data Use Agreements (DUAs) are contractual documents used for the
transfer of nonpublic data that is subject to restrictions on its use.
DUAs typically address important issues such as limitations on use of
the data, obligations to safeguard the data, liability for harm arising
from the use of the data, publication, data destruction or return and
privacy rights that are associated with transfers of confidential or
protected data.

Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) is a contract used to govern the
exchange of research data or materials between organizations. Examples
include:

> Cell lines, cultures, bacteria, nucleotides, proteins, transgenic
> animals, pharmaceuticals, and chemicals, or data cell lines, cultures,
> bacteria, nucleotides, proteins, transgenic animals, pharmaceuticals,
> and chemicals, or data software, models, robots tangible research
> material or raw datasets (but not databases, which are protected by
> copyright)

## Data Use Agreements (DUA)

Data Use Agreements (DUA) are contractual documents used for the
transfer of nonpublic data that is subject to restrictions on its use.
The data provider typically originates DUAs. Contact Fred Hutch Business
Development to initiate a DUA or review a received DUA, using this
[questionnaire](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/u/business-dev/form-questionnaire.html).
DUAs serve to outline the terms and conditions of the transfer.
Specifically, DUAs address important issues such as limitations on use
of the data, obligations to safeguard the data, liability for harm
arising from the use of the data, publication, data destruction or
return and privacy rights that are associated with transfers of
confidential or protected data.

-   DUAs serve to outline the terms and conditions of the transfer.

-   DUAs are used most commonly for sharing data within research and/or
    collaboration. DUAs are most often used when transferring data
    between Fred Hutch and an external entity (outside of the UW/Cancer
    Consortium) and may be used for transferring sensitive information
    between Fred Hutch and its consortium partners.

-   DUAs typically originate with the sender. DUAs may be specific, such
    as those incorporated into the context of a Clinical Trial Agreement
    or a sponsored research agreement, or they can be general.

-   If a Fred Hutch clinical trial is part of a multi-site trial, DUAs
    may be required to conduct the trial.

-   Most data sharing involves de-identified data. Less common is
    sharing research data with individually identifiable health
    information for which patient informed consent and HIPAA
    authorization has been signed. Both types of data are required by
    Fred Hutch to have a DUA when sharing data.

-   The Privacy Rule permits sharing of a Limited Data Set (‘LDS’),
    which includes some identifiers. An LDS may be disclosed for
    research activities if the disclosing entity and the LDS recipient
    enter into a data use agreement. Limited Data Sets may be used or
    disclosed only for purposes of research, public health, or health
    care operation.

Various departments, including Business Developmnet, InfoSec,
Compliance, Data Governance, and the Office of the General Counsel
(OGC), may review DUAs. Currently, Business Development initiates DUAs
for Fred Hutch. Use [this
questionnaire](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/u/business-dev/form-questionnaire.html)
to determine if a DUA is suitable for your needs.

## Material Transfer Agreement (MTA)

A Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) is a contract used to govern the
exchange of research data or materials between organizations.

The Fred Hutch Business Development & Strategy (BD&S) is responsible for
negotiating and signing all MTAs with outside organizations. Fred Hutch
BD&S is responsible for:

-   transferring materials from Fred Hutch (as Provider) to another
    academic or non-profit organization as Recipient), or

-   receiving materials from another organization or company.

BD receives requests to review MTAs; they partner with other stakeholder
departemtns to review all agreements to ensure contractual obligations
are consistent with Fred Hutch policy and/or federal law.

Whether for inbound or outbound materials, MTAs are critical documents
that require signatures from the Provider(s) and Recipient
institution(s) to ensure that each party will comply with the terms of
the agreement. Fred Hutch investigators cannot sign MTAs on behalf of
the Fred Hutch. If the MTA is embedded in a Sponsored Research
Agreement, is linked to a clinical trial, or is for clinical use or
clinical studies in humans, the investigator should contact Business
Development.

If you are unsure what type of agreement you require, please see
Business Development's [Agreement Form
Questionnaire](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/u/business-dev/form-questionnaire.html).
