_datascience/wdl_workflows.md, before:

---
title: Workflow Description Language (WDL)
primary_reviewers: vortexing, tefirman
last_modified_at: 2025-11-11
---

The Workflow Description Language (WDL) is an open-source language for describing data processing workflows with human-readable syntax. WDL makes it straightforward to define analysis tasks, chain them together in workflows, and parallelize their execution across different computing environments.

## Why Use WDL?

### Easy to Read and Share
WDL's design emphasizes clarity and simplicity:
- **Human-readable syntax** makes workflows easy to understand, review, and customize as necessary
- **Standardized format** enables sharing across institutions and research groups
- **Reusable components** through task libraries like the [WILDS WDL Library](/datascience/wilds_wdl/)

### Easy to Execute
WDL separates the scientific logic (what to compute) from infrastructure details (where and how to compute):
- No need to write SLURM submission scripts or cloud deployment code
- Execution engines handle job scheduling, resource allocation, and data staging
- Focus on your science, not on system administration

### Reproducibility
WDL workflows explicitly define every aspect of your analysis:
- **Exact software versions** through containerization (Docker/Apptainer)
- **Deterministic execution** that produces identical results across different platforms
- All required inputs and files clearly specified upfront

This means a workflow written today will produce the same results months or years later, regardless of changes to your computing environment.

### Portability
Write once, run anywhere. WDL workflows can execute on:
- Local workstations
- Institutional HPC clusters (like Fred Hutch's Gizmo)
- Cloud platforms (AWS, Google Cloud, Azure)
- Workflow platforms (Terra, DNAnexus, [PROOF](/datascience/proof/))

The same workflow file runs identically across all these environments without modification.

## WDL Fundamentals

### Structure Overview

A WDL workflow consists of three main components:

1. **Workflow**: Defines the overall analysis pipeline and how tasks connect
2. **Tasks**: Individual units of work (like running a specific tool)
3. **Inputs**: Parameters and files needed to run the workflow

### Anatomy of a Task

Here's an example task that aligns sequencing reads using BWA:

```wdl
task BwaMem {
  input {
    File input_fastq
    String base_file_name
    File ref_fasta
  }

  command <<<
    # Index reference if needed
    bwa index ~{ref_fasta}

    # Align reads
    bwa mem -p -v 3 -t 16 -M \
      ~{ref_fasta} ~{input_fastq} > ~{base_file_name}.sam

    # Convert to BAM
    samtools view -1bS -@ 15 -o ~{base_file_name}.aligned.bam ~{base_file_name}.sam
  >>>

  output {
    File output_bam = "~{base_file_name}.aligned.bam"
  }

  runtime {
    cpu: 16
    memory: "32 GB"
    docker: "getwilds/bwa:0.7.17"
  }
}
```

**Key sections:**

- **`input`**: Files and parameters the task needs
- **`command`**: Shell commands to execute (note the `~{variable}` syntax for variable interpolation)
- **`output`**: Files generated by the task that can be used by downstream tasks
- **`runtime`**: Computing resources and software environment (container) required

### Anatomy of a Workflow

Workflows orchestrate multiple tasks:

```wdl
version 1.0

workflow AlignAndCallVariants {
  input {
    File input_fastq
    File reference_genome
    String sample_name
  }

  # Align reads
  call BwaMem {
    input:
      input_fastq = input_fastq,
      ref_fasta = reference_genome,
      base_file_name = sample_name
  }

  # Call variants
  call HaplotypeCaller {
    input:
      input_bam = BwaMem.output_bam,
      ref_fasta = reference_genome,
      sample_name = sample_name
  }

  output {
    File aligned_bam = BwaMem.output_bam
    File variants_vcf = HaplotypeCaller.output_vcf
  }
}
```

**Key features:**

- Tasks are executed using `call` statements
- Task outputs are referenced as `TaskName.output_name` and passed as inputs to subsequent tasks
- Workflow inputs can be passed to multiple tasks
- Workflow outputs define which files to keep as final results

### Providing Inputs

Inputs are typically provided via JSON files:

```json
{
  "AlignAndCallVariants.input_fastq": "/path/to/sample1.fastq.gz",
  "AlignAndCallVariants.reference_genome": "/path/to/hg38.fa",
  "AlignAndCallVariants.sample_name": "patient_001"
}
```

This separation allows the same workflow to run on different datasets without modifying the WDL file.

## Containerization Strategies

### Why Containers?

Containers ensure reproducibility by packaging software with all its dependencies:
- Eliminates "works on my machine" problems
- Guarantees consistent software versions
- Simplifies complex dependency management
- Makes workflows immediately runnable on new systems

### Docker

Docker is the most common containerization platform for WDL workflows:

```wdl
runtime {
  docker: "getwilds/star:2.7.6a"
}
```

The [WILDS Docker Library](https://github.com/getwilds/wilds-docker-library) provides pre-built, tested containers for common bioinformatics tools. For more on using Docker at Fred Hutch, see our [Docker guide](/compdemos/Docker/).

### Apptainer (formerly Singularity)

On HPC clusters that don't allow Docker (like Fred Hutch's Gizmo), WDL execution engines can be configured to use Apptainer instead:

- You still specify `docker:` in your WDL runtime section
- The execution engine (when properly configured) converts Docker images to Apptainer format
- Your workflow code remains portable - the same WDL works with both Docker and Apptainer
- Note: This requires the execution engine to be set up with Apptainer support (platforms like [PROOF](/datascience/proof/) handle this configuration for you)

For more details on using Apptainer at Fred Hutch, see our [Apptainer guide](/compdemos/Apptainer/).

### Environment Modules (HPC-specific)

Some HPC systems use module systems (like EasyBuild/Lmod) for software management. At Fred Hutch, you can leverage [our extensive module collection](/scicomputing/compute_scientificSoftware/):

```wdl
runtime {
  modules: "SAMtools/1.11-GCC-10.2.0"
}
```

However, this approach reduces portability since modules are institution-specific. For workflows you plan to share, containers are preferred. Learn more about environment modules and containers in our [Computing Environments guide](/scicomputing/compute_environments/).

## Advanced Features

### Parallelization with Scatter-Gather

Process multiple samples or genomic regions in parallel:

```wdl
workflow ProcessMultipleSamples {
  input {
    Array[File] sample_fastqs
    File reference_genome
  }

  scatter (fastq in sample_fastqs) {
    call AlignReads {
      input:
        input_fastq = fastq,
        ref_fasta = reference_genome
    }
  }

  output {
    Array[File] all_bams = AlignReads.output_bam
  }
}
```

The execution engine automatically parallelizes scattered tasks across available compute resources.

### Conditional Execution

Run tasks only when certain conditions are met:

```wdl
if (run_quality_control) {
  call FastQC {
    input: reads = input_fastq
  }
}
```

### Task-level Retry Logic

Automatically retry tasks that fail due to transient issues:

```wdl
runtime {
  maxRetries: 3
  docker: "getwilds/bwa:0.7.17"
}
```

## Workflow Development Best Practices

### Start Small, Scale Up
1. Develop with small test datasets on a single sample
2. Validate outputs are correct
3. Scale to full datasets using scatter-gather
4. Let the execution engine handle parallelization

### Version Everything
- Use specific container tags (not `latest`)
- Specify WDL version at the top of your file: `version 1.0`
- Track your workflow in version control (Git)

### Modularize Your Code
- Break complex analyses into reusable tasks
- Import tasks from libraries like [WILDS WDL Library](/datascience/wilds_wdl/)
- One workflow per repository for easier sharing

### Document Your Work
- Add comments explaining complex logic
- Include example input JSON files
- Provide a README with workflow purpose and requirements

## Getting Started with WDL

### Learning Resources

**Official Documentation:**
- [OpenWDL Specification](https://github.com/openwdl/wdl/blob/main/versions/1.0/SPEC.md) - Complete language reference
- [OpenWDL Learn WDL](https://github.com/openwdl/learn-wdl) - Tutorials and examples
- [WDL Docs](https://wdl-docs.readthedocs.io/) - Additional documentation and guides

**Fred Hutch Resources:**
- [DaSL Developing WDL Workflows](https://hutchdatascience.org/Developing_WDL_Workflows/) - Comprehensive course
- [PROOF](/datascience/proof/) - User-friendly WDL execution platform
- [WILDS WDL Library](/datascience/wilds_wdl/) - Ready-to-use tasks and workflows
- [WILDS Docker Library](/datascience/wilds_docker/) - Pre-built containers for bioinformatics tools

**Community Resources:**
- [WARP](https://broadinstitute.github.io/warp/docs/get-started) - Broad Institute's WDL workflows
- [GATK Workflows](https://github.com/gatk-workflows) - Production genomics pipelines
- [bioWDL](https://biowdl.github.io/) - Bioinformatics workflow templates

### Development Tools

**VS Code Extension:**
- [WDL Syntax Highlighter](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=broadinstitute.wdl) - Syntax highlighting and error detection
- [Sprocket Extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=stjude-rust-labs.sprocket-vscode) - Integrated WDL execution and debugging with Sprocket


**Validation Tools:**
- `sprocket lint` - Lint WDL files for best practices
- `miniwdl check` - Lint and validate WDL files
- `womtool validate` - Check WDL syntax without running

## Running WDL Workflows

WDL workflows require an execution engine to run. See our guide on [WDL Execution Engines](/datascience/wdl_execution_engines/) for details on:
- **Cromwell** - Best for shared HPC systems with advanced features
- **miniWDL** - Lightweight, easy local execution
- **Sprocket** - Modern alternative with easy setup

At Fred Hutch, you can also use [PROOF](/datascience/proof/) for a user-friendly interface to submit WDL workflows to our cluster.

## Utilizing the WILDS WDL Library

The [WILDS WDL Library](/datascience/wilds_wdl/) provides tested, reusable components:

```wdl
version 1.0

import "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library/refs/heads/main/modules/ww-sra/ww-sra.wdl" as sra_tasks
import "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library/refs/heads/main/modules/ww-star/ww-star.wdl" as star_tasks

workflow RNAseqFromSRA {
  input {
    String sra_id
    File reference_genome
    File gene_annotations
  }

  call sra_tasks.fastqdump {
    input: sra_id = sra_id
  }

  call star_tasks.star_align {
    input:
      fastq = fastqdump.fastq,
      genome = reference_genome,
      annotations = gene_annotations
  }

  output {
    File aligned_bam = star_align.output_bam
    File gene_counts = star_align.counts
  }
}
```

This approach lets you build complex workflows quickly without writing every task from scratch. If there's a tool/workflow that you think would be useful, feel free to file an issue in the [WILDS WDL Library GitHub repo](https://github.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library/issues) or [reach out to us directly!](#getting-help)

## Getting Help

**Fred Hutch Resources:**
- [WILDS Team](mailto:wilds@fredhutch.org) - WDL workflow support
- [#workflow-managers Slack](https://fhdata.slack.com/archives/CJFP1NYSZ) - Community discussion
- [Data House Calls](https://ocdo.fredhutch.org/programs/dhc.html#research-computing-and-data-management) - One-on-one consultations

**Broader Community:**
- [OpenWDL Community](https://openwdl.org/) - Language specification and governance
- [Terra Support Forum](https://support.terra.bio/hc/en-us/sections/360007274612) - General WDL questions
- [WDL Slack Channel](https://join.slack.com/t/openwdl/shared_invite/zt-ctmj4mhf-cFBNxIiZYs6SY9HgM9UAVw) - Community support

## Next Steps

1. **Learn the basics** with [Data Science Lab's WDL course](https://hutchdatascience.org/Developing_WDL_Workflows/)
2. **Explore examples** in the [WILDS WDL Library](/datascience/wilds_wdl/)
3. **Choose an execution engine** - see [WDL Execution Engines](/datascience/wdl_execution_engines/)
4. **Run your first workflow** using [PROOF](/datascience/proof/) or a local executor
5. **Join the community** in [#workflow-managers Slack](https://fhdata.slack.com/archives/CJFP1NYSZ)

Commit message:

Adding a link to the online WDL course in the WDL Fundamentals section

_datascience/wdl_workflows.md, after:

---
title: Workflow Description Language (WDL)
primary_reviewers: vortexing, tefirman
last_modified_at: 2025-11-11
---

The Workflow Description Language (WDL) is an open-source language for describing data processing workflows with human-readable syntax. WDL makes it straightforward to define analysis tasks, chain them together in workflows, and parallelize their execution across different computing environments.

## Why Use WDL?

### Easy to Read and Share
WDL's design emphasizes clarity and simplicity:
- **Human-readable syntax** makes workflows easy to understand, review, and customize as necessary
- **Standardized format** enables sharing across institutions and research groups
- **Reusable components** through task libraries like the [WILDS WDL Library](/datascience/wilds_wdl/)

### Easy to Execute
WDL separates the scientific logic (what to compute) from infrastructure details (where and how to compute):
- No need to write SLURM submission scripts or cloud deployment code
- Execution engines handle job scheduling, resource allocation, and data staging
- Focus on your science, not on system administration

### Reproducibility
WDL workflows explicitly define every aspect of your analysis:
- **Exact software versions** through containerization (Docker/Apptainer)
- **Deterministic execution** that produces identical results across different platforms
- All required inputs and files clearly specified upfront

This means a workflow written today will produce the same results months or years later, regardless of changes to your computing environment.

### Portability
Write once, run anywhere. WDL workflows can execute on:
- Local workstations
- Institutional HPC clusters (like Fred Hutch's Gizmo)
- Cloud platforms (AWS, Google Cloud, Azure)
- Workflow platforms (Terra, DNAnexus, [PROOF](/datascience/proof/))

The same workflow file runs identically across all these environments without modification.

## WDL Fundamentals

Let's start with a high-level overview of WDL syntax (for more comprehensive instruction, see our [online WDL course](https://hutchdatascience.org/Developing_WDL_Workflows/)).

### Structure Overview

A WDL workflow consists of three main components:

1. **Workflow**: Defines the overall analysis pipeline and how tasks connect
2. **Tasks**: Individual units of work (like running a specific tool)
3. **Inputs**: Parameters and files needed to run the workflow

### Anatomy of a Task

Here's an example task that aligns sequencing reads using BWA:

```wdl
task BwaMem {
  input {
    File input_fastq
    String base_file_name
    File ref_fasta
  }

  command <<<
    # Index reference if needed
    bwa index ~{ref_fasta}

    # Align reads
    bwa mem -p -v 3 -t 16 -M \
      ~{ref_fasta} ~{input_fastq} > ~{base_file_name}.sam

    # Convert to BAM
    samtools view -1bS -@ 15 -o ~{base_file_name}.aligned.bam ~{base_file_name}.sam
  >>>

  output {
    File output_bam = "~{base_file_name}.aligned.bam"
  }

  runtime {
    cpu: 16
    memory: "32 GB"
    docker: "getwilds/bwa:0.7.17"
  }
}
```

**Key sections:**

- **`input`**: Files and parameters the task needs
- **`command`**: Shell commands to execute (note the `~{variable}` syntax for variable interpolation)
- **`output`**: Files generated by the task that can be used by downstream tasks
- **`runtime`**: Computing resources and software environment (container) required

### Anatomy of a Workflow

Workflows orchestrate multiple tasks:

```wdl
version 1.0

workflow AlignAndCallVariants {
  input {
    File input_fastq
    File reference_genome
    String sample_name
  }

  # Align reads
  call BwaMem {
    input:
      input_fastq = input_fastq,
      ref_fasta = reference_genome,
      base_file_name = sample_name
  }

  # Call variants
  call HaplotypeCaller {
    input:
      input_bam = BwaMem.output_bam,
      ref_fasta = reference_genome,
      sample_name = sample_name
  }

  output {
    File aligned_bam = BwaMem.output_bam
    File variants_vcf = HaplotypeCaller.output_vcf
  }
}
```

**Key features:**

- Tasks are executed using `call` statements
- Task outputs are referenced as `TaskName.output_name` and passed as inputs to subsequent tasks
- Workflow inputs can be passed to multiple tasks
- Workflow outputs define which files to keep as final results

### Providing Inputs

Inputs are typically provided via JSON files:

```json
{
  "AlignAndCallVariants.input_fastq": "/path/to/sample1.fastq.gz",
  "AlignAndCallVariants.reference_genome": "/path/to/hg38.fa",
  "AlignAndCallVariants.sample_name": "patient_001"
}
```

This separation allows the same workflow to run on different datasets without modifying the WDL file.

## Containerization Strategies

### Why Containers?

Containers ensure reproducibility by packaging software with all its dependencies:
- Eliminates "works on my machine" problems
- Guarantees consistent software versions
- Simplifies complex dependency management
- Makes workflows immediately runnable on new systems

### Docker

Docker is the most common containerization platform for WDL workflows:

```wdl
runtime {
  docker: "getwilds/star:2.7.6a"
}
```

The [WILDS Docker Library](https://github.com/getwilds/wilds-docker-library) provides pre-built, tested containers for common bioinformatics tools. For more on using Docker at Fred Hutch, see our [Docker guide](/compdemos/Docker/).

### Apptainer (formerly Singularity)

On HPC clusters that don't allow Docker (like Fred Hutch's Gizmo), WDL execution engines can be configured to use Apptainer instead:

- You still specify `docker:` in your WDL runtime section
- The execution engine (when properly configured) converts Docker images to Apptainer format
- Your workflow code remains portable - the same WDL works with both Docker and Apptainer
- Note: This requires the execution engine to be set up with Apptainer support (platforms like [PROOF](/datascience/proof/) handle this configuration for you)

For more details on using Apptainer at Fred Hutch, see our [Apptainer guide](/compdemos/Apptainer/).

### Environment Modules (HPC-specific)

Some HPC systems use module systems (like EasyBuild/Lmod) for software management. At Fred Hutch, you can leverage [our extensive module collection](/scicomputing/compute_scientificSoftware/):

```wdl
runtime {
  modules: "SAMtools/1.11-GCC-10.2.0"
}
```

However, this approach reduces portability since modules are institution-specific. For workflows you plan to share, containers are preferred. Learn more about environment modules and containers in our [Computing Environments guide](/scicomputing/compute_environments/).

## Advanced Features

### Parallelization with Scatter-Gather

Process multiple samples or genomic regions in parallel:

```wdl
workflow ProcessMultipleSamples {
  input {
    Array[File] sample_fastqs
    File reference_genome
  }

  scatter (fastq in sample_fastqs) {
    call AlignReads {
      input:
        input_fastq = fastq,
        ref_fasta = reference_genome
    }
  }

  output {
    Array[File] all_bams = AlignReads.output_bam
  }
}
```

The execution engine automatically parallelizes scattered tasks across available compute resources.

### Conditional Execution

Run tasks only when certain conditions are met:

```wdl
if (run_quality_control) {
  call FastQC {
    input: reads = input_fastq
  }
}
```

### Task-level Retry Logic

Automatically retry tasks that fail due to transient issues:

```wdl
runtime {
  maxRetries: 3
  docker: "getwilds/bwa:0.7.17"
}
```

## Workflow Development Best Practices

### Start Small, Scale Up
1. Develop with small test datasets on a single sample
2. Validate outputs are correct
3. Scale to full datasets using scatter-gather
4. Let the execution engine handle parallelization

### Version Everything
- Use specific container tags (not `latest`)
- Specify WDL version at the top of your file: `version 1.0`
- Track your workflow in version control (Git)

### Modularize Your Code
- Break complex analyses into reusable tasks
- Import tasks from libraries like [WILDS WDL Library](/datascience/wilds_wdl/)
- One workflow per repository for easier sharing

### Document Your Work
- Add comments explaining complex logic
- Include example input JSON files
- Provide a README with workflow purpose and requirements

## Getting Started with WDL

### Learning Resources

**Official Documentation:**
- [OpenWDL Specification](https://github.com/openwdl/wdl/blob/main/versions/1.0/SPEC.md) - Complete language reference
- [OpenWDL Learn WDL](https://github.com/openwdl/learn-wdl) - Tutorials and examples
- [WDL Docs](https://wdl-docs.readthedocs.io/) - Additional documentation and guides

**Fred Hutch Resources:**
- [DaSL Developing WDL Workflows](https://hutchdatascience.org/Developing_WDL_Workflows/) - Comprehensive course
- [PROOF](/datascience/proof/) - User-friendly WDL execution platform
- [WILDS WDL Library](/datascience/wilds_wdl/) - Ready-to-use tasks and workflows
- [WILDS Docker Library](/datascience/wilds_docker/) - Pre-built containers for bioinformatics tools

**Community Resources:**
- [WARP](https://broadinstitute.github.io/warp/docs/get-started) - Broad Institute's WDL workflows
- [GATK Workflows](https://github.com/gatk-workflows) - Production genomics pipelines
- [bioWDL](https://biowdl.github.io/) - Bioinformatics workflow templates

### Development Tools

**VS Code Extension:**
- [WDL Syntax Highlighter](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=broadinstitute.wdl) - Syntax highlighting and error detection
- [Sprocket Extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=stjude-rust-labs.sprocket-vscode) - Integrated WDL execution and debugging with Sprocket


**Validation Tools:**
- `sprocket lint` - Lint WDL files for best practices
- `miniwdl check` - Lint and validate WDL files
- `womtool validate` - Check WDL syntax without running

## Running WDL Workflows

WDL workflows require an execution engine to run. See our guide on [WDL Execution Engines](/datascience/wdl_execution_engines/) for details on:
- **Cromwell** - Best for shared HPC systems with advanced features
- **miniWDL** - Lightweight, easy local execution
- **Sprocket** - Modern alternative with easy setup

At Fred Hutch, you can also use [PROOF](/datascience/proof/) for a user-friendly interface to submit WDL workflows to our cluster.

## Utilizing the WILDS WDL Library

The [WILDS WDL Library](/datascience/wilds_wdl/) provides tested, reusable components:

```wdl
version 1.0

import "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library/refs/heads/main/modules/ww-sra/ww-sra.wdl" as sra_tasks
import "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library/refs/heads/main/modules/ww-star/ww-star.wdl" as star_tasks

workflow RNAseqFromSRA {
  input {
    String sra_id
    File reference_genome
    File gene_annotations
  }

  call sra_tasks.fastqdump {
    input: sra_id = sra_id
  }

  call star_tasks.star_align {
    input:
      fastq = fastqdump.fastq,
      genome = reference_genome,
      annotations = gene_annotations
  }

  output {
    File aligned_bam = star_align.output_bam
    File gene_counts = star_align.counts
  }
}
```

This approach lets you build complex workflows quickly without writing every task from scratch. If there's a tool/workflow that you think would be useful, feel free to file an issue in the [WILDS WDL Library GitHub repo](https://github.com/getwilds/wilds-wdl-library/issues) or [reach out to us directly!](#getting-help)

## Getting Help

**Fred Hutch Resources:**
- [WILDS Team](mailto:wilds@fredhutch.org) - WDL workflow support
- [#workflow-managers Slack](https://fhdata.slack.com/archives/CJFP1NYSZ) - Community discussion
- [Data House Calls](https://ocdo.fredhutch.org/programs/dhc.html#research-computing-and-data-management) - One-on-one consultations

**Broader Community:**
- [OpenWDL Community](https://openwdl.org/) - Language specification and governance
- [Terra Support Forum](https://support.terra.bio/hc/en-us/sections/360007274612) - General WDL questions
- [WDL Slack Channel](https://join.slack.com/t/openwdl/shared_invite/zt-ctmj4mhf-cFBNxIiZYs6SY9HgM9UAVw) - Community support

## Next Steps

1. **Learn the basics** with [Data Science Lab's WDL course](https://hutchdatascience.org/Developing_WDL_Workflows/)
2. **Explore examples** in the [WILDS WDL Library](/datascience/wilds_wdl/)
3. **Choose an execution engine** - see [WDL Execution Engines](/datascience/wdl_execution_engines/)
4. **Run your first workflow** using [PROOF](/datascience/proof/) or a local executor
5. **Join the community** in [#workflow-managers Slack](https://fhdata.slack.com/archives/CJFP1NYSZ)
