_generation/clsp_clinicalCov.md, before:

---
title: Clinical Covariates
---

We will describe what data management systems are available to Fred Hutch researchers, to access and interpret clinical data for a select cohort.  The ability to identify suitable biospecimens associated with a cohort--available via collaboration with other researchers or via a specimen repository--is critical to enable the generation of large scale data sets associated with patient phenotypes. There are multiple groups involved in the data access and management of clinically originating data, including Collaborative Data Services (CDS), the Hutch Data Commonwealth (HDC) and the Seattle Tumor Translational Research group (STTR).  The current recommendations and descriptions of available resources for this work will be described here.   

### Available Resources
- [LabMatrix](http://www.biofortis.com/labmatrix){:target="_blank"}<!--_-->): LabMatrix is a specimen tracking platform that can be used to capture clinical and laboratory covariates. One of its main strengths is the ability to capture lineage of specimen processing steps in a workflow (for example, multiple nucleic acid types could be extracted from the same tissue). Currently, the [STTR group](https://www.fredhutch.org/en/labs/seattle-translational-tumor-research.html){:target="_blank"}<!--_-->) is piloting a LabMatrix project at the Hutch.

- REDCap is an online data capture system used by the Fred Hutch via STTR and includes version-control and access-restriction features.  [Here](https://research.fhcrc.org/cds/en/redcap.html){:target="_blank"}<!--_--> is the Hutch's Collaborative Data Services (CDS) page for REDCap.

Commit message:

Added REDCap training page; updated LabMatrix description in specimenBanking

_generation/clsp_clinicalCov.md, after:

---
title: Clinical Covariates
---

We will describe what data management systems are available to Fred Hutch researchers, to access and interpret clinical data for a select cohort.  The ability to identify suitable biospecimens associated with a cohort--available via collaboration with other researchers or via a specimen repository--is critical to enable the generation of large scale data sets associated with patient phenotypes. There are multiple groups involved in the data access and management of clinically originating data, including Collaborative Data Services (CDS), the Hutch Data Commonwealth (HDC) and the Seattle Tumor Translational Research group (STTR).  The current recommendations and descriptions of available resources for this work will be described here.   

### Available Resources
- [LabMatrix](http://www.biofortis.com/labmatrix){:target="_blank"}<!--_-->): LabMatrix is a specimen tracking platform that can be used to capture clinical and laboratory covariates. One of its main strengths is the ability to capture lineage of specimen processing steps in a workflow (for example, multiple nucleic acid types could be extracted from the same tissue). Currently, the [STTR group](https://www.fredhutch.org/en/labs/seattle-translational-tumor-research.html){:target="_blank"}<!--_-->) is piloting a LabMatrix project at the Hutch.

- [REDCap](https://projectredcap.org){:target="_blank"}<!--_-->): REDCap projects are flexible and secure ways to capture multiple types of data, including clinical covariates. REDCap includes version-control and access-restriction features. Fred Hutch has its [own instance](http://research.fhcrc.org/cds/en/redcap.html){:target="_blank"}<!--_-->) of REDCap and offers many [training opportunities](http://research.fhcrc.org/cds/en/redcap-training.html){:target="_blank"}<!--_-->) to support researchers.
