_generation/datagen_genomics.md, before:

# Bioinformatics and Genomics Resource Library

Relevant wiki pages are linked with each subheading.
The resources section at the end of each page is a great start;
these links are placed under the most relevant heading or subheading.

Each external (e.g., non-wiki) link should include a brief explanation of why it's included, what a reader can find there, etc.

The order of subheadings can change;
it may be useful to look at how other help sites categorize types of genomic data collection.

FIXME indicates top priorities.

## Genomics

Subheadings from https://www.fredhutch.org/en/research/shared-resources/core-facilities/genomics-bioinformatics/genomics-services.html,
some additional listed below "Other services" that may be included eventually (but not now).

### Library prep and quality assessment

Sections from wiki, not represented in SR pages

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_platformsData/#library-preparation-for-sequencing

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_assayPrep/

### Illumina

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_platformsData/#illumina-sequencers

### PacBio

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_platformsData/#pacific-biosciences-pacbio-long-range-sequencer

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_dnaApproaches/#smrt-sequencing-pacbio

### Sanger

### 10X genomics

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_platformsData/#10x-genomics-single-cell-library-preparation-system

### Microarrays

Should we include this?
Not mentioned on SR genomics page, but may be listed elsewhere?

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_dnaApproaches/#dna-microarrays

## Bioinformatics

Subheadings from https://www.fredhutch.org/en/research/shared-resources/core-facilities/genomics-bioinformatics/bioinformatics-services.html.

### RNAseq

- [RNA sequencing: the teenage years](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41576-019-0150-2#Sec32): an overview of RNA seq technologies, methods, and where the tech is headed.
- [A survey of best practices for RNA seq data analysis](https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-016-0881-8)
- [University of Oregon RNA-seqlopedia](https://rnaseq.uoregon.edu/)
- [Introduction to RNA-seq for researchers](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7BLS_YY9HeM&t=758s): A 30 min video reviewing RNA-sequencing concepts.

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_rnaApproaches/#rna-sequencing

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_rnaApproaches/#qualitative-approaches-transcript-and-splicing-discovery

#### small RNAs (e.g., miRNA)

Not specifically mentioned in SR pages?

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_rnaApproaches/#example--small-rnas-eg-mirna

### Cleavage Under Targets and Release Using Nuclease (CUT&RUN)

- [How CUT&RUN profiles chromatin](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Ol055tXVvA)
- [An efficient targeted nuclease strategy for high-resolution mapping of DNA binding sites](https://elifesciences.org/articles/21856): 
- [Lay off the ChIPs: CUT&RUN instead](https://www.fredhutch.org/en/news/spotlight/2017/02/lay-off-the-chips--cut-run-instead.html)

### Whole exome sequencing

- [Illumina whole-exome sequencing resources](https://www.illumina.com/techniques/sequencing/dna-sequencing/targeted-resequencing/exome-sequencing.html)
- [Roche: whole exome sequencing](https://sequencing.roche.com/en/research-application/application/whole-exome-sequencing.html)
- [The promise of whole-exome sequencing in medical genetics](https://www.nature.com/articles/jhg2013114)

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_dnaApproaches/#capture-based-sequencing---example--whole-exome-sequencing

### Targeted sequencing

- [Illumina targeted sequencing resource](https://www.illumina.com/techniques/sequencing/dna-sequencing/targeted-resequencing/targeted-panels.html)
- 

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_dnaApproaches/#amplicon-based-sequencing---targeted-dna-sequencing

### CRISPR screens

- [CRISPR basics](https://grcf.jhmi.edu/products/crisprs/crispr-basics/)
- [CRISPR: Gene editing and beyond](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4YKFw2KZA5o)
- 

### ChIPseq

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_dnaApproaches/#chromatin-immunoprecipitation-sequencing-chip-seq

### ATACseq (DNA accessibility)

FIXME

### PhIPseq

### VirScan

### 10X single-cell analyses

### RRBS (Reduced Representation Bisulfite Sequencing)

Should we include this?
Not mentioned on SR genomics page, but may be listed elsewhere?

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_dnaApproaches/#reduced-representation-bisulfite-sequencing-rrbs

### Nanostring

Should we include this,
perhaps with RNAseq under a subheading of "gene expression"?
Not mentioned on SR genomics page, but may be listed elsewhere?

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_platformsData/#single-nucleotide-polymorphism-snp-arrays-or-methylation-arrays

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_rnaApproaches/#nanostring-gene-expression-panels

Commit message:

add resources for targeted and atac seq

_generation/datagen_genomics.md, after:

# Bioinformatics and Genomics Resource Library

Relevant wiki pages are linked with each subheading.
The resources section at the end of each page is a great start;
these links are placed under the most relevant heading or subheading.

Each external (e.g., non-wiki) link should include a brief explanation of why it's included, what a reader can find there, etc.

The order of subheadings can change;
it may be useful to look at how other help sites categorize types of genomic data collection.

FIXME indicates top priorities.

## Genomics

Subheadings from https://www.fredhutch.org/en/research/shared-resources/core-facilities/genomics-bioinformatics/genomics-services.html,
some additional listed below "Other services" that may be included eventually (but not now).

### Library prep and quality assessment

Sections from wiki, not represented in SR pages

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_platformsData/#library-preparation-for-sequencing

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_assayPrep/

### Illumina

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_platformsData/#illumina-sequencers

### PacBio

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_platformsData/#pacific-biosciences-pacbio-long-range-sequencer

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_dnaApproaches/#smrt-sequencing-pacbio

### Sanger

### 10X genomics

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_platformsData/#10x-genomics-single-cell-library-preparation-system

### Microarrays

Should we include this?
Not mentioned on SR genomics page, but may be listed elsewhere?

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_dnaApproaches/#dna-microarrays

## Bioinformatics

Subheadings from https://www.fredhutch.org/en/research/shared-resources/core-facilities/genomics-bioinformatics/bioinformatics-services.html.

### RNAseq

- [RNA sequencing: the teenage years](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41576-019-0150-2#Sec32): an overview of RNA seq technologies, methods, and where the tech is headed.
- [A survey of best practices for RNA seq data analysis](https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-016-0881-8)
- [University of Oregon RNA-seqlopedia](https://rnaseq.uoregon.edu/)
- [Introduction to RNA-seq for researchers](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7BLS_YY9HeM&t=758s): A 30 min video reviewing RNA-sequencing concepts.
- [Next generation sequencing (Illumina_: an introduction](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CZeN-IgjYCo)

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_rnaApproaches/#rna-sequencing

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_rnaApproaches/#qualitative-approaches-transcript-and-splicing-discovery

#### small RNAs (e.g., miRNA)

Not specifically mentioned in SR pages?

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_rnaApproaches/#example--small-rnas-eg-mirna

### Cleavage Under Targets and Release Using Nuclease (CUT&RUN)

- [How CUT&RUN profiles chromatin](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Ol055tXVvA)
- [An efficient targeted nuclease strategy for high-resolution mapping of DNA binding sites](https://elifesciences.org/articles/21856): 
- [Lay off the ChIPs: CUT&RUN instead](https://www.fredhutch.org/en/news/spotlight/2017/02/lay-off-the-chips--cut-run-instead.html)

### Whole exome sequencing

- [Illumina whole-exome sequencing resources](https://www.illumina.com/techniques/sequencing/dna-sequencing/targeted-resequencing/exome-sequencing.html)
- [Roche: whole exome sequencing](https://sequencing.roche.com/en/research-application/application/whole-exome-sequencing.html)
- [The promise of whole-exome sequencing in medical genetics](https://www.nature.com/articles/jhg2013114)

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_dnaApproaches/#capture-based-sequencing---example--whole-exome-sequencing

### Targeted sequencing

- [Illumina targeted sequencing resource](https://www.illumina.com/techniques/sequencing/dna-sequencing/targeted-resequencing/targeted-panels.html)
- [Disease-targeted sequecning: a cornerstone in the clinic](https://www.nature.com/articles/nrg3463)
- [Applications and analysis of targeted genome sequencing in cancer studies](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6861594/)

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_dnaApproaches/#amplicon-based-sequencing---targeted-dna-sequencing

### CRISPR screens

- [CRISPR basics](https://grcf.jhmi.edu/products/crisprs/crispr-basics/)
- [CRISPR: Gene editing and beyond](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4YKFw2KZA5o)
- [Application of CRISPR technologies in research and beyond](https://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.3659)

### ChIPseq

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_dnaApproaches/#chromatin-immunoprecipitation-sequencing-chip-seq

### ATACseq (DNA accessibility)

- [Complete guide to understanding and using ATACseq](https://www.activemotif.com/blog-atac-seq)
- [ATAC-seq: a method for assaying chromatin accessability genome-wide](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4374986/)
- [A brief overview of ATAC-seq](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gy0sjLW2dxE)

### PhIPseq

### VirScan

### 10X single-cell analyses

### RRBS (Reduced Representation Bisulfite Sequencing)

Should we include this?
Not mentioned on SR genomics page, but may be listed elsewhere?

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_dnaApproaches/#reduced-representation-bisulfite-sequencing-rrbs

### Nanostring

Should we include this,
perhaps with RNAseq under a subheading of "gene expression"?
Not mentioned on SR genomics page, but may be listed elsewhere?

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_platformsData/#single-nucleotide-polymorphism-snp-arrays-or-methylation-arrays

https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/generation/datagen_rnaApproaches/#nanostring-gene-expression-panels
