_generation/data-viz.md, before:

---
title: Data visualization
last_modified_at: 2020-07-09
primary_reviewers: k8hertweck
---

## Software

- [Tableau](https://www.tableau.com/)
  - [Internal: Fred Hutch Tableau FAQ](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/u/tableau/faq.html)
  - [Tableau Hutch User Group](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/u/tableau.html)
- [MATLAB](https://www.mathworks.com/products/matlab.html)
  - [Get Started with MATLAB](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/getting-started-with-matlab.html)
  - [MATLAB at Fred Hutch](https://sharedresources.fredhutch.org/libresources/matlab)
- Excel


## R packages

- [ggplot2](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/)
  - [ggplot2 cheatsheet](https://rstudio.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/ggplot2-cheatsheet.pdf)
  - [Data visualization with ggplot2](https://datacarpentry.org/R-ecology-lesson/04-visualization-ggplot2.html)
  - Fredhutch.io's [Introduction to R](https://github.com/fredhutchio/r_intro) course covers ggplot in [class 4](https://github.com/fredhutchio/r_intro/blob/master/class4.md)
- [Plotly](https://plotly-r.com/)
  - [Getting started with Plotly in ggplot2](https://plotly.com/ggplot2/getting-started/)
  - [Plotly ggplot2 graphing library](https://plotly.com/ggplot2/)
  - [Plotly community forum](https://community.plotly.com/)
- [Shiny](https://shiny.rstudio.com/)
  - [Learn Shiny](https://shiny.rstudio.com/tutorial/)
  - [Mastering Shiny - Hadley Wickham](https://mastering-shiny.org/)
  - [Fred Hutch Biomedical Data Science Wiki entry on Shiny applications](https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/compdemos/shiny/)

## Python libraries

- [Seaborn](https://seaborn.pydata.org/index.html)
  - [Seaborn user guide and tutorials](https://seaborn.pydata.org/tutorial.html)
  - [Python Data Science Handbook, Chapter 4: Data visualization with Seaborn](https://jakevdp.github.io/PythonDataScienceHandbook/04.14-visualization-with-seaborn.html)
- [Matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/index.html)
  - [Matplotlib tutorial](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/jrjohansson/scientific-python-lectures/blob/master/Lecture-4-Matplotlib.ipynb)
- [Plotnine](https://plotnine.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)
  - Fredhutch.io's [Introduction to Python](https://github.com/fredhutchio/python_intro) course covers plotnine in [class 4](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/fredhutchio/python_intro/blob/master/class4.ipynb)
- [Plotly](https://plotly.com/python/)
  - [A Kaggle Plotly tutorial for beginners](https://www.kaggle.com/kanncaa1/plotly-tutorial-for-beginners/notebook)

## Data Visualization Books

**General**
- [Fundamentals of Data Visualization - Claus Wilke](https://serialmentor.com/dataviz/index.html)

**R**
- [R for Data Science, Chapter 3: Data visualisation - Garrett Grolemund and Hadley Wickham](https://r4ds.had.co.nz/data-visualisation.html)
- [ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis - Hadley Wickham, Danielle Navarro, and Thomas Lin Pedersen](https://ggplot2-book.org/)
- [R Graphics Cookbook - Winston Chang](https://r-graphics.org/index.html)

**Python**

## Data Viz at Fred Hutch
- Data visualization group
- Data viz slack channel
- FredHutch.io courses

## Data Viz Blogs
- https://flowingdata.com/
- https://informationisbeautiful.net/

Commit message:

more reformatting, remove excess info, add fh resources

_generation/data-viz.md, after:

---
title: Data visualization
last_modified_at: 2020-07-09
primary_reviewers: k8hertweck
---

## Software

>Fred Hutch's Center IT (CIT) supports a wide range of commonly used software at little to no cost to you! We've pulled out a short list of software relevant to data visualization, but you can view the entire software catelog [here](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/u/center-it/software.html)

- [Tableau](https://www.tableau.com/)
  - [Internal: Fred Hutch Tableau FAQ](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/u/tableau/faq.html)
  - [Internal: Tableau Hutch User Group](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/u/tableau.html)
- [MATLAB](https://www.mathworks.com/products/matlab.html)
  - [Get Started with MATLAB](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/getting-started-with-matlab.html)
  - [MATLAB at Fred Hutch](https://sharedresources.fredhutch.org/libresources/matlab)
- [Microsoft Excel](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-365/excel)


## R packages

- [ggplot2](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/)
  - [ggplot2 cheatsheet](https://rstudio.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/ggplot2-cheatsheet.pdf)
  - [Data visualization with ggplot2](https://datacarpentry.org/R-ecology-lesson/04-visualization-ggplot2.html)
  - Fredhutch.io's [Introduction to R](https://github.com/fredhutchio/r_intro) course covers ggplot in [class 4](https://github.com/fredhutchio/r_intro/blob/master/class4.md)
- [Plotly](https://plotly-r.com/)
  - [Getting started with Plotly in ggplot2](https://plotly.com/ggplot2/getting-started/)
- [Shiny](https://shiny.rstudio.com/)
  - [Learn Shiny](https://shiny.rstudio.com/tutorial/)
  - [Mastering Shiny - Hadley Wickham](https://mastering-shiny.org/)
  - [Fred Hutch Biomedical Data Science Wiki entry on Shiny applications](https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/compdemos/shiny/)

## Python libraries

- [Seaborn](https://seaborn.pydata.org/index.html)
  - [Seaborn user guide and tutorials](https://seaborn.pydata.org/tutorial.html)
- [Matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/index.html)
  - [Matplotlib tutorial](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/jrjohansson/scientific-python-lectures/blob/master/Lecture-4-Matplotlib.ipynb)
- [Plotnine](https://plotnine.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)
  - Fredhutch.io's [Introduction to Python](https://github.com/fredhutchio/python_intro) course covers plotnine in [class 4](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/fredhutchio/python_intro/blob/master/class4.ipynb)
- [Plotly](https://plotly.com/python/)
  - [A Kaggle Plotly tutorial for beginners](https://www.kaggle.com/kanncaa1/plotly-tutorial-for-beginners/notebook)

## Books

**General**
- [Fundamentals of Data Visualization - Claus Wilke](https://serialmentor.com/dataviz/index.html)

**R**
- [R for Data Science, Chapter 3: Data visualisation - Garrett Grolemund and Hadley Wickham](https://r4ds.had.co.nz/data-visualisation.html)
- [ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis - Hadley Wickham, Danielle Navarro, and Thomas Lin Pedersen](https://ggplot2-book.org/)
- [R Graphics Cookbook - Winston Chang](https://r-graphics.org/index.html)

**Python**
- [Python Data Science Handbook, Chapter 4: Data visualization with Seaborn - Jake VanderPlas](https://jakevdp.github.io/PythonDataScienceHandbook/04.14-visualization-with-seaborn.html)

## Data visualization blogs
- [Flowing Data](https://flowingdata.com/)
- [Nightingale: The journal of the Data Visualization Society](https://medium.com/nightingale)
- [The Pudding](https://pudding.cool/)
- [Information is Beautiful](https://informationisbeautiful.net/)

## Data visualization resources at Fred Hutch
- Join the [Coop Communities Slack](https://fhbig.slack.com/) and follow the #data-viz channel. This channel is a space to share visualization ideas, ask questions, and troubleshoot code!
- [FredHutch.io](http://www.fredhutch.io/) offers introduction to [R](https://www.fredhutch.io/resources/#introduction-to-r) and [Python](https://www.fredhutch.io/resources/#introduction-to-python) courses that touch on data visualization along with other fundamentals for beginners.
- [The Data Visualization Center](https://viz.fredhutch.org/)
