_generation/human_deidentification.md, before:

---
title: De-identification of Specimens and Data
last_modified_at: 2018-10-25
main_authors: Susan Glick, Jason Major, Jennifer Kogut, Karen Hansen
primary_reviewers: JasonMajor1, sgglick
---
## What is de-identification?

De-identification refers to the removal or dissociation of direct patient
identifiers from a research specimen or data set in order to inhibit the ability
to deduce an individual identity. Ideally after de-identification, it would not
be possible to use any remaining information alone or in combination with other
readily available information to identify the subject from which the data
originated. Furthermore, Human Subjects Protection dictates the identifiers of
source subjects cannot be readily ascertained or otherwise associated with the
data by the research staff or secondary data users (45 CFR 46.102(f)). The goal
of de-identification is to reduce, to the greatest extent possible, the risk of
identifying individuals from which specimens are obtained or associated genomic
datasets are generated. In the setting of genomics, this would include
considerations for the condition where genomic datasets generated from a human
specimen may be deposited in a publicly available setting for the purposes of
data sharing for further research. The most common method is the Safe Harbor
method, removal of 18 identifiers as listed in [HIPAA regulation (45 CFR 164.514(b)(2).](https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/privacy/special-topics/de-identification/index.html)

Ethnicity, gender, age, marital status, geographical location, and preferred
language are types of descriptors (indirect identifiers) which when combined can
enable a patient to be re-identified. This presents particular concerns with
regard to privacy, stigmatization, and discrimination, since the ability to
protect the confidentiality of these individuals or groups participating in the
research is diminished. For example, members of an identifiable population may
be stigmatized or discriminated against if research reveals that the group is at
high risk of having a genetic variant associated with a particular disease. For
some communities, close family relationships also may make it especially
challenging to protect participants' privacy, even if research samples are
de-identified. To ensure confidentiality, not only direct identifiers should be
removed. Indirect identifiers, such as date of birth, location, marital status,
preferred language and ethnicity should also be reviewed and removed when
possible.

Some types of individual-level genomic data can be used to identify an
individual even without the 18 identifiers. Thus, de-identification of genomics
data also heavily relies on additional methods of confidentiality and security
that are unique to the particular data type involved, such as adherence to
strong data use limitations and practices. Genetic data (generally considered to
refer to the sequence of a person\'s genome, though there is still ambiguity
about how that relates to different types of genomic datasets) is considered
Strictly Confidential under the FH Data Classification and Handling Standard.

## How can a specimen be de-identified?

Under HIPAA, specimens/private information can be de-identified by replacing
direct (and indirect) identifiers with a masking/coding schema. Masking schema
should use coding that does not include any component of the identifiable
patient data or have a direct relationship with them which can be ensured via
randomization of coded identifiers. For data that may need to be re-identified
later, retaining appropriate documentation of the mapping between identifiable
data from patients, specimens or datasets, and the coded identifiers generated
is critical. Depending on the study design and protocol, the entity retaining
this mapping documentation will be responsible for preventing non-approved
re-identification. In some cases if the research group maintains this mapping
documentation then their research will still be considered human subjects,
though if the mapping is maintained by a non-involved 3rd party the research may
be considered exempt.

There is often a question of whether the HIPAA de-identification process is
enough to render de-identified specimens/private information sufficiently
non-identifiable for exemption from human subjects research. A specimen
de-identified under HIPAA is not the same as a non-identifiable specimen for
research (Office of Human Research Protection). Under research, a specimen
rendered non-identifiable under 45 CFR 46.102(f) could qualify as exempt from
human subjects research. A non-identifiable specimen (thus not human subject
research) must meet the following two requirements:

1.  The private information or specimens are NOT collected for a specific
research project through an interaction or intervention with living
individuals; and

2.  The investigator(s) cannot readily ascertain the identity of the
individual(s) to whom the coded private information or specimens pertain
because, for example:

-   The investigators and the holder of the key enter into an agreement
    prohibiting the release of the key to the investigators under any
    circumstances, until the individuals are deceased (note that the HHS
    regulations do not require the IRB to review and approve this agreement);

-   There are IRB-approved written policies and operating procedures for a
    repository or data management center that prohibit the release of the key
    to the investigators under any circumstances, until the individuals are
    deceased; or

-   There are other legal requirements prohibiting the release of the key to the investigators, until the individuals are deceased.

## How can a genomic dataset be de-identified?

If all direct and indirect identifiers are removed from a genomic data set, the
genomic data itself may still be able to identify a patient depending on the
data type and degree of processing of the specific data entity. The inclusion of
racial, ethnic and genders in scientific research however, can be a reason to
retain some of these indirect identifiers in the context of research datasets.
Thus, in addition, confidentiality is supported through strong use limitations,
data use agreements and appropriate data security.

Commit message:

Inserted link to FH Guide HIPAA and Research
Added a sentence to link to additional information posted.

_generation/human_deidentification.md, after:

---
title: De-identification of Specimens and Data
last_modified_at: 2018-10-25
main_authors: Susan Glick, Jason Major, Jennifer Kogut, Karen Hansen
primary_reviewers: JasonMajor1, sgglick
---
## What is de-identification?

De-identification refers to the removal or dissociation of direct patient
identifiers from a research specimen or data set in order to inhibit the ability
to deduce an individual identity. Ideally after de-identification, it would not
be possible to use any remaining information alone or in combination with other
readily available information to identify the subject from which the data
originated. Furthermore, Human Subjects Protection dictates the identifiers of
source subjects cannot be readily ascertained or otherwise associated with the
data by the research staff or secondary data users (45 CFR 46.102(f)). The goal
of de-identification is to reduce, to the greatest extent possible, the risk of
identifying individuals from which specimens are obtained or associated genomic
datasets are generated. In the setting of genomics, this would include
considerations for the condition where genomic datasets generated from a human
specimen may be deposited in a publicly available setting for the purposes of
data sharing for further research. The most common method is the Safe Harbor
method, removal of 18 identifiers as listed in [HIPAA regulation (45 CFR 164.514(b)(2).](https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/privacy/special-topics/de-identification/index.html) A Fred Hutch guide on HIPAA and Research is on the [HDC Compliance and Security Centernet Page.](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/u/hdc/compliance---governance/_jcr_content/leftParsys/download_307265254/file.res/2019_10%2520PHI%2520and%2520Research%252018%2520HIPAA%2520Identifiers%2520and%2520More.pdf)

Ethnicity, gender, age, marital status, geographical location, and preferred
language are types of descriptors (indirect identifiers) which when combined can
enable a patient to be re-identified. This presents particular concerns with
regard to privacy, stigmatization, and discrimination, since the ability to
protect the confidentiality of these individuals or groups participating in the
research is diminished. For example, members of an identifiable population may
be stigmatized or discriminated against if research reveals that the group is at
high risk of having a genetic variant associated with a particular disease. For
some communities, close family relationships also may make it especially
challenging to protect participants' privacy, even if research samples are
de-identified. To ensure confidentiality, not only direct identifiers should be
removed. Indirect identifiers, such as date of birth, location, marital status,
preferred language and ethnicity should also be reviewed and removed when
possible. 

Some types of individual-level genomic data can be used to identify an
individual even without the 18 identifiers. Thus, de-identification of genomics
data also heavily relies on additional methods of confidentiality and security
that are unique to the particular data type involved, such as adherence to
strong data use limitations and practices. Genetic data (generally considered to
refer to the sequence of a person\'s genome, though there is still ambiguity
about how that relates to different types of genomic datasets) is considered
Strictly Confidential under the FH Data Classification and Handling Standard.

## How can a specimen be de-identified?

Under HIPAA, specimens/private information can be de-identified by replacing
direct (and indirect) identifiers with a masking/coding schema. Masking schema
should use coding that does not include any component of the identifiable
patient data or have a direct relationship with them which can be ensured via
randomization of coded identifiers. For data that may need to be re-identified
later, retaining appropriate documentation of the mapping between identifiable
data from patients, specimens or datasets, and the coded identifiers generated
is critical. Depending on the study design and protocol, the entity retaining
this mapping documentation will be responsible for preventing non-approved
re-identification. In some cases if the research group maintains this mapping
documentation then their research will still be considered human subjects,
though if the mapping is maintained by a non-involved 3rd party the research may
be considered exempt.

There is often a question of whether the HIPAA de-identification process is
enough to render de-identified specimens/private information sufficiently
non-identifiable for exemption from human subjects research. A specimen
de-identified under HIPAA is not the same as a non-identifiable specimen for
research (Office of Human Research Protection). Under research, a specimen
rendered non-identifiable under 45 CFR 46.102(f) could qualify as exempt from
human subjects research. A non-identifiable specimen (thus not human subject
research) must meet the following two requirements:

1.  The private information or specimens are NOT collected for a specific
research project through an interaction or intervention with living
individuals; and

2.  The investigator(s) cannot readily ascertain the identity of the
individual(s) to whom the coded private information or specimens pertain
because, for example:

-   The investigators and the holder of the key enter into an agreement
    prohibiting the release of the key to the investigators under any
    circumstances, until the individuals are deceased (note that the HHS
    regulations do not require the IRB to review and approve this agreement);

-   There are IRB-approved written policies and operating procedures for a
    repository or data management center that prohibit the release of the key
    to the investigators under any circumstances, until the individuals are
    deceased; or

-   There are other legal requirements prohibiting the release of the key to the investigators, until the individuals are deceased.

## How can a genomic dataset be de-identified?

If all direct and indirect identifiers are removed from a genomic data set, the
genomic data itself may still be able to identify a patient depending on the
data type and degree of processing of the specific data entity. The inclusion of
racial, ethnic and genders in scientific research however, can be a reason to
retain some of these indirect identifiers in the context of research datasets.
Thus, in addition, confidentiality is supported through strong use limitations,
data use agreements and appropriate data security.
