_generation/human_consentIRB.md, before:

---
title: Consenting and Large Scale Data
last_modified_at: 2018-09-06
main_authors: Jason Major, Jennifer Kogut, Karen Hansen
---
Before beginning a study and during the proposal preparation process, an
important issue to consider is whether the proposed research qualifies
as human subjects research as defined by the Department of Health and
Human Services Office for Human Research Protections ([OHRP](https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/)) and/or the National Institutes of Health.
Take a look at the [OHRP decision charts](https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/decision-charts/index.html)
and/or the [NIH questionnaire to find out what aspects of human subjects research may apply.](MISSING LINK)

## IRB Approval in Human Subjects Research

Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) exist to protect the rights and
welfare of human research subjects. IRB oversight supports compliance
with the current standards of human subjects research and with current
regulations. When conducting its review for genomic research, the IRB
will look at whether the research involves human subjects.

When starting a research project that may involve the generation of
large-scale genetic or other large-scale molecular datasets, a first
step is to ensure that the consent forms involved in the study or studies during which the intended specimens were collected include
language specific to the possibility of generating these types of data
and how those data can be used and shared.

In some cases, the use of
human specimens to generate large-scale molecular datasets is not
considered human subjects research and thus not subject to specific
requirements that human subjects research is, even though the dataset
uses human data. This distinction can allow studies that only use human specimens/data to not be subjected to the relatively high level of documentation and reporting requirements that a study that does involve human subjects would be.  

For NIH grant applications submitted after January 25,
2018, a new required form allows for more clarity if a study does not
qualify as human subjects, but does use human specimens and/or data.
More about this form, the PHS Human Subject and Clinical Trial
Information form can be found
[here.](https://grants.nih.gov/policy/clinical-trials/new-human-subject-clinical-trial-info-form.html)
This form requires the investigator to have reviewed the NIH
questionnaire and if the study does involved human specimens and/or data
(but not human subjects) an additional document is required to address
why the study does not qualify as human subjects according to the NIH. .

### Available Resources

-   If you are affiliated with the the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center or Seattle Cancer Care Alliance, a good place to start is the [Fred Hutch IRB.](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/u/irb.html)

-   Similarly, if you work for the University of Washington, the [UW IRB](https://www.washington.edu/research/hsd/) curates that information.

-   If you currently have an NIH grant, are considering applying for one, or are in the process of writing one, consider taking a look at [the NIH's human subjects research site.](https://humansubjects.nih.gov/)

-   For more information about using human specimens, cell lines or data in the context of a non-human subjects study, [here is a pdf of a decision tree provided by the NIH.](https://humansubjects.nih.gov/sites/hs/public_files/privateinfoorbiospecimensdecisionchart.pdf)

## Retrospectively Banked Specimens and IRB Review

It is important to be aware that the timeframe in which the specimens
were banked may affect the IRB review of the foundational collection
consents. On January 25, 2015, NIH policy for viewing and sharing
genomic data changed. Consent documents associated with human specimens
banked before this date will have different (and fewer) IRB review
criteria than consent documents associated with human specimens banked
after this date. For data made from human specimens banked after this
date, the patient consent documents will be required to address broad
sharing in order for broad data sharing to occur. Sharing may be
possible for specimens banked earlier for which the consent documents
may be ambiguous with respect to genomic datasets. It is important to
consult with the relevant IRB if a consent with sharing requirements can
limit the types of data which can be generated and if such a consent can
restrict secondary usage or sharing of generated data.

## NIH Genomic Data Sharing and Informed Consent

If you are working under an NIH grant and sharing data that may fall
under the NIH Genomic Data Sharing (GDS) policy, you should be aware of
whether the data you are receiving was collected under appropriate
consent. The GDS Policy expects subjects who are asked to enroll in a
study in which genomic data are obtained to also be asked for their
informed consent to the future research use and broad sharing of their
data. Only if potential subjects provide such consent would broad
sharing of the data be permissible. If a subject does not consent, he or
she may still be enrolled in the study, but their data may not be
shared, or may be shared in a limited manner consistent with the
specifics of the consent form. The IRB of the entity sharing the data
will make a determination about what can be shared and any limitations.

In order to meet the NIH expectations under the GDS Policy, for research
projects for which the IRB has granted a waiver of some or all of the
required elements of informed consent under 45 CFR 46.116(d), or consent
is not required because the activity is not subject to 45 CFR 46,
investigators will still need to seek or document consent for future use
and broad sharing of genomic and phenotypic data. At minimum, the
information described below should be provided to prospective
participants.

In order to meet the expectations for future research use and broad
sharing under the GDS Policy, the consent should capture and convey in
language understandable to prospective participants information along
the following lines:

-   Genomic and phenotypic data and any other data relevant for the
 study (such as exposure or disease status) will be generated and
 may be used for future research on any topic and shared broadly in
 a manner consistent with the consent and all applicable federal
 and state laws and regulations.

-   Prior to submitting the data to an NIH-designated data repository,
 data will be stripped of identifiers such as name, address,
 account and other identification numbers and will be de-identified
 by standards consistent with the Common Rule. Safeguards to
 protect the data according to Federal standards for information
 protection will be implemented.

-   Access to de-identified participant data will be controlled, unless
 participants explicitly consent to allow unrestricted access to
 and use of their data for any purpose. Because it may be possible
 to re-identify de-identified genomic data, even if access to data
 is controlled and data security standards are met, confidentiality
 cannot be guaranteed, and re-identified data could potentially be
 used to discriminate against or stigmatize participants, their
 families, or groups. In addition, there may be unknown risks.

-   No direct benefits to participants are expected from any secondary
 research that may be conducted.

-   Participants may withdraw consent for research use of genomic or
 phenotypic data at any time without penalty or loss of benefits to
 which the participant is otherwise entitled. In this event, data
 will be withdrawn from any repository, if possible, but data
 already distributed for research use will not be retrieved.

-   The name and contact information of an individual who is affiliated
 with the institution and familiar with the research and will be
 available to address participant questions.

-   Studies that include whole genome sequencing (WGS), whole exome sequencing (WES), epigenetic profiles, microbiotic profiles, and related forms of in-depth extra-genomic data generate immense
 amounts of personal information about participants. It is
 important to draw a distinction between targeted genetic research
 and broader sequencing protocols, so that participants understand
 the scope of data generation.

### Available Resources

-   See also [National Institutes of Health Points to Consider in Developing Effective Data Use Limitation Statements,](https://osp.od.nih.gov/wp-content/uploads/NIH_PTC_in_Developing_DUL_Statements.pdf) prepared by the Office of Science Policy July 13, 2015).

-   The national Human Genome Research Institute has a page for
 [Informed Consent for Genomic Research.](MISING LINK)

-   The NIH Genomic Data Sharing Policy is
 [[here,]{.underline}](https://osp.od.nih.gov/scientific-sharing/genomic-data-sharing/)
 and a useful FAQ is [here.](MISING LINK)

-   Large-scale genomic data include genome-wide association studies
 (GWAS), single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) arrays, and genome
 sequence, transcriptomic, metagenomic, epigenomic, and gene
 expression data. Examples of research that are subject to the GDS
 Policy include, but are not limited to, projects that involve
 generating the whole genome sequence data for more than one gene
 from more than 1,000 individuals, or analyzing 300,000 or more
 genetic variants in more than 1,000 individuals, or sequencing
 more than a 100 isolates of infectious organisms such as bacteria.
 The [[Supplemental Information to the NIH Genomic Data Sharing
 Policy]{.underline}](https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-14-124.html)
 includes detailed description of research under scope of the
 policy and data submission expectations.

-   The Fred Hutch IRB policy information can be found [here, sign-in required if off campus](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/u/irb.html),
 including the Genomic Data Sharing Supplement [here.](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/f/irb/genomic-data-sharing-supplement.html)

-   NIH Information on Institutional Certifications is
 [here.](https://osp.od.nih.gov/scientific-sharing/institutional-certifications/)
 NOTE: Fred Hutch cannot issue a provisional or final
 "Institutional Certificate" unless Fred Hutch is uploading the
 final genomic data.

Commit message:

a few typos and minor change to new human subjects determination form
change that to than, clarified language and added link to new form if human data used in non human research subject research

_generation/human_consentIRB.md, after:


title: Consenting and Large Scale Data
last_modified_at: 2018-09-06
main_authors: Jason Major, Jennifer Kogut, Karen Hansen
---
Before beginning a study and during the proposal preparation process, an
important issue to consider is whether the proposed research qualifies
as human subjects research as defined by the Department of Health and
Human Services Office for Human Research Protections ([OHRP](https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/)) and/or the National Institutes of Health.
Take a look at the [OHRP decision charts](https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/decision-charts/index.html)
and/or the [NIH questionnaire to find out what aspects of human subjects research may apply.](MISSING LINK)

## IRB Approval in Human Subjects Research

Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) exist to protect the rights and
welfare of human research subjects. IRB oversight supports compliance
with the current standards of human subjects research and with current
regulations. When conducting its review for genomic research, the IRB
will look at whether the research involves human subjects.

When starting a research project that may involve the generation of
large-scale genetic or other large-scale molecular datasets, a first
step is to ensure that the consent forms involved in the study or studies during which the intended specimens were collected include
language specific to the possibility of generating these types of data
and how those data can be used and shared.

In some cases, the use of
human specimens to generate large-scale molecular datasets is not
considered human subjects research, and thus not subject to the specific
requirements of human subjects research, even though the dataset
uses human data. This distinction allows studies which use human specimens/data and deemed not human subjects research to avoid the relatively high level of documentation and reporting requirements of human subjects research.

For NIH grant applications submitted after January 25,
2018, a new required form allows for more clarity if a study does not
qualify as human subjects, but does use human specimens and/or data.
More about this form, the PHS Human Subject and Clinical Trial
Information form can be found
[here.](https://grants.nih.gov/policy/clinical-trials/new-human-subject-clinical-trial-info-form.html)
This form requires the investigator to have reviewed the NIH
questionnaire; if the study does involve human specimens and/or data, but is not deemed human subjects research,
additional documentation or justification is required. An example of the Research Involving Private Information or Biological Specimens flowchart is [here.] (https://grants.nih.gov/grants/policy/hs/PrivateInfoOrBioSpecimensDecisionChart.pdf)

### Available Resources

-   If you are affiliated with the the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center or Seattle Cancer Care Alliance, a good place to start is the [Fred Hutch IRB.](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/u/irb.html)

-   Similarly, if you work for the University of Washington, the [UW IRB](https://www.washington.edu/research/hsd/) curates that information.

-   If you currently have an NIH grant, are considering applying for one, or are in the process of writing one, consider taking a look at [the NIH's human subjects research site.](https://humansubjects.nih.gov/)

-   For more information about using human specimens, cell lines or data in the context of a non-human subjects study, [here is a pdf of a decision tree provided by the NIH.](https://humansubjects.nih.gov/sites/hs/public_files/privateinfoorbiospecimensdecisionchart.pdf)

## Retrospectively Banked Specimens and IRB Review

It is important to be aware that the timeframe in which the specimens
were banked may affect the IRB review of the foundational collection
consents. On January 25, 2015, NIH policy for viewing and sharing
genomic data changed. Consent documents associated with human specimens
banked before this date will have different (and fewer) IRB review
criteria than consent documents associated with human specimens banked
after this date. For data made from human specimens banked after this
date, the patient consent documents will be required to address broad
sharing in order for broad data sharing to occur. Sharing may be
possible for specimens banked earlier for which the consent documents
may be ambiguous with respect to genomic datasets. It is important to
consult with the relevant IRB if a consent with sharing requirements can
limit the types of data which can be generated and if such a consent can
restrict secondary usage or sharing of generated data.

## NIH Genomic Data Sharing and Informed Consent

If you are working under an NIH grant and sharing data that may fall
under the NIH Genomic Data Sharing (GDS) policy, you should be aware of
whether the data you are receiving was collected under appropriate
consent. The GDS Policy expects subjects who are asked to enroll in a
study in which genomic data are obtained to also be asked for their
informed consent to the future research use and broad sharing of their
data. Only if potential subjects provide such consent would broad
sharing of the data be permissible. If a subject does not consent, he or
she may still be enrolled in the study, but their data may not be
shared, or may be shared in a limited manner consistent with the
specifics of the consent form. The IRB of the entity sharing the data
will make a determination about what can be shared and any limitations.

In order to meet the NIH expectations under the GDS Policy, for research
projects for which the IRB has granted a waiver of some or all of the
required elements of informed consent under 45 CFR 46.116(d), or consent
is not required because the activity is not subject to 45 CFR 46,
investigators will still need to seek or document consent for future use
and broad sharing of genomic and phenotypic data. At minimum, the
information described below should be provided to prospective
participants.

In order to meet the expectations for future research use and broad
sharing under the GDS Policy, the consent should capture and convey in
language understandable to prospective participants information along
the following lines:

-   Genomic and phenotypic data and any other data relevant for the
 study (such as exposure or disease status) will be generated and
 may be used for future research on any topic and shared broadly in
 a manner consistent with the consent and all applicable federal
 and state laws and regulations.

-   Prior to submitting the data to an NIH-designated data repository,
 data will be stripped of identifiers such as name, address,
 account and other identification numbers and will be de-identified
 by standards consistent with the Common Rule. Safeguards to
 protect the data according to Federal standards for information
 protection will be implemented.

-   Access to de-identified participant data will be controlled, unless
 participants explicitly consent to allow unrestricted access to
 and use of their data for any purpose. Because it may be possible
 to re-identify de-identified genomic data, even if access to data
 is controlled and data security standards are met, confidentiality
 cannot be guaranteed, and re-identified data could potentially be
 used to discriminate against or stigmatize participants, their
 families, or groups. In addition, there may be unknown risks.

-   No direct benefits to participants are expected from any secondary
 research that may be conducted.

-   Participants may withdraw consent for research use of genomic or
 phenotypic data at any time without penalty or loss of benefits to
 which the participant is otherwise entitled. In this event, data
 will be withdrawn from any repository, if possible, but data
 already distributed for research use will not be retrieved.

-   The name and contact information of an individual who is affiliated
 with the institution and familiar with the research and will be
 available to address participant questions.

-   Studies that include whole genome sequencing (WGS), whole exome sequencing (WES), epigenetic profiles, microbiotic profiles, and related forms of in-depth extra-genomic data generate immense
 amounts of personal information about participants. It is
 important to draw a distinction between targeted genetic research
 and broader sequencing protocols, so that participants understand
 the scope of data generation.

### Available Resources

-   See also [National Institutes of Health Points to Consider in Developing Effective Data Use Limitation Statements,](https://osp.od.nih.gov/wp-content/uploads/NIH_PTC_in_Developing_DUL_Statements.pdf) prepared by the Office of Science Policy July 13, 2015).

-   The national Human Genome Research Institute has a page for
 [Informed Consent for Genomic Research.](MISING LINK)

-   The NIH Genomic Data Sharing Policy is
 [[here,]{.underline}](https://osp.od.nih.gov/scientific-sharing/genomic-data-sharing/)
 and a useful FAQ is [here.](MISING LINK)

-   Large-scale genomic data include genome-wide association studies
 (GWAS), single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) arrays, and genome
 sequence, transcriptomic, metagenomic, epigenomic, and gene
 expression data. Examples of research that are subject to the GDS
 Policy include, but are not limited to, projects that involve
 generating the whole genome sequence data for more than one gene
 from more than 1,000 individuals, or analyzing 300,000 or more
 genetic variants in more than 1,000 individuals, or sequencing
 more than a 100 isolates of infectious organisms such as bacteria.
 The [[Supplemental Information to the NIH Genomic Data Sharing
 Policy]{.underline}](https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-14-124.html)
 includes detailed description of research under scope of the
 policy and data submission expectations.

-   The Fred Hutch IRB policy information can be found [here, sign-in required if off campus](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/u/irb.html),
 including the Genomic Data Sharing Supplement [here.](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/f/irb/genomic-data-sharing-supplement.html)

-   NIH Information on Institutional Certifications is
 [here.](https://osp.od.nih.gov/scientific-sharing/institutional-certifications/)
 NOTE: Fred Hutch cannot issue a provisional or final
 "Institutional Certificate" unless Fred Hutch is uploading the
 final genomic data.
