_generation/study_overview.md, before:

---
title: Overview of Study Design in the Era of Genomics
last_modified_at: 2018-06-06
---
One of the most important first steps in your study design is to **identify the primary experimental objective**.

## Experimental objectives: Quantitative vs. Qualitative
These are the two general experimental types: qualitative (also known as investigative or annotation) and quantitative (also known as comparative).

### Qualitative Studies
Generally, qualitative experiments focus on the identification or description of features in a genome, transcriptome, etc.  Examples include the identification of intron boundaries, CpG islands, or novel somatic mutations.  These experiments are typically more broad in scope, encompassing an exome, genome, methylome or transcriptome.  Here, sequencing coverage is more important than sequencing depth. If rare targets are of interest, high sequencing depth becomes more valuable.  

### Quantitative
Quantitative experiments are used to make statistical comparisons between two or more cohorts or experimental groups.  Examples include differential gene expression (DGE), comparison of variant allele frequencies (VAFs), or differential methylation studies.  Here, the depth of the sequencing is the experimental priority--such that sequencing depth is high enough to reveal the significant differences between targets. Biological replicates are essential in these studies to allow statistical inferences to be made among groups.

More details about study design using large scale molecular datasets is to come.

## Available Resources
  - [University of Oregon's RNA-seqlopedia: Experimental Design](https://rnaseq.uoregon.edu/#exp-design-experimental-objectives){:target="_blank"}<!--_-->: a more in-depth description of considerations for sequencing experimental design, focusing on RNA-sequencing.
  - Fred Hutch Biostatistics Resource: Email FH username **biostatistics**
  - Fred Hutch Bioinformatics Core:  Email FH username **bioinformatics**

Commit message:

Re-org study design overview
moved some descriptions from the DG overview to the study design overview page.  Added a little text for clarity

_generation/study_overview.md, after:

---
title: Overview of Study Design in the Era of Genomics
last_modified_at: 2018-06-06
---
## Study Design
In this section we will provide some guidance for researchers looking to develop a hypothesis that will have reasonable statistical power, identify the appropriate set of samples, and execute a large scale data production from those samples.  

There are the two general types of studies using large scale molecular data sets, which can loosely be thought of as "investigative" and "comparative."  The two aren't completely extricable and can each can serve as groundwork for future experiments for the other.  The process to perform these types of studies, however, can be very different.  The details specific to each study type are best addressed prior to generating materials or data sets.  

### Proposal Materials and Support
You could design a house without an architect, but a large part of the time and money you would spend could be alleviated by involvement from people for whom this procedural and rote knowledge is their job.  The same is true for execution of a study involving large scale molecular datasets, where there is an incredible quantity of decision-making relating to study design, sample preparation, genomics data production, bioinformatics, and statistics. To give your study the best chance of succeeding (both in getting funding and answering hypotheses), it's best to identify a set of collaborators familiar with aspects of the research for which your team does not already have expertise.  

The Translational Genomics Data Coordination Center is available for collaboration in grant-supported translational studies for assistance with data management.  Services include providing access and training on a system of data management tools for large scale molecular data and facilitating collaborations with various affiliated members of the Fred Hutch community with expertise in sample banking, assay material preparation, genomics data generation, bioinformatics and statistics.  The Translational Genomics Data Coordination Center can assist in the select areas where your team does not have expertise.  NIH grant materials, tailored to the needs of your particular study, are provided following consultation.

### Hypothesis Development and Big Molecular Data
Clearly defining the experimental hypothesis will ease the process of evaluating the available tools and techniques.  There are the two general experimental types: qualitative (also known as investigative or annotation) and quantitative (also known as comparative).

Generally, qualitative experiments focus on the identification or description of features in a genome, transcriptome, etc.  Examples include the identification of intron boundaries, CpG islands, or novel somatic mutations.  These experiments are typically more broad in scope, encompassing an exome, genome, methylome or transcriptome.  Here, sequencing coverage is more important than sequencing depth. If rare targets are of interest, high sequencing depth becomes more valuable.  

Quantitative experiments are used to make statistical comparisons between two or more cohorts or experimental groups.  Examples include differential gene expression (DGE), comparison of variant allele frequencies (VAFs), or differential methylation studies.  Here, the depth of the sequencing is the experimental priority--such that sequencing depth is high enough to reveal the significant differences between targets. Biological replicates are essential in these studies to allow statistical inferences to be made among groups.

### Statistics
Finding a collaborator to help identify if any biological feature supports or rejects your hypothesis can be critical when using large scale molecular data.  Multiple testing, difficulty determining biological significance, and power issues are common for large data sets where the number of measurements (p) is much larger than the sample size (n).  The statistics required when n>>p are very different than those when p>>n and finding someone who is well versed in the specific issues that arise in this context is important.  

There are different groups available at the Fred Hutch who collaborate with researchers using large scale datasets and can provide valuable insight into study design, data types and hypothesis generation as well as assistance with downstream analytics.  

### Available Resources
  - [University of Oregon's RNA-seqlopedia: Experimental Design](https://rnaseq.uoregon.edu/#exp-design-experimental-objectives){:target="_blank"}<!--_-->: a more in-depth description of considerations for sequencing experimental design, focusing on RNA-sequencing.
  - Fred Hutch Biostatistics Resource: Email FH username **biostatistics**
  - Fred Hutch Bioinformatics Core:  Email FH username **bioinformatics**
